GEORGE GEITH OF FEN COURT.

CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTORY

Quite close to Fenchurch Street  within a few yards of that noisy and crowded
thoroughfare  there lies hidden away as quiet and forsaken-looking a spot as
the heart of man need desire to see. 
It is called Fen Court, and I (the narrator) should like to take my readers
thither. We have paced the City pavements together before now, and (I the
narrator) am glad to be threading the familiar streets and alleys in good company again. 
A narrow covered passage affords ingress to Fen Court, which is but a portion
of the graveyard, once attached to St Gabriel, one of the many churches
destroyed by the Great Fire of 1666, and never rebuilt. The parish was
subsequently united to that of St Margaret Pattens, and this little piece of
ground is all that now remains to tell us of a church past which flowed the
clear waters of Langbourne. 
It is beside the bones of those who peopled London in those days that we are
standing. Shall we sit down for a moment on the churchyard wall, and leaning
back against the iron railings, think of the City they knew before commencing
this common place story of modern men and modern doings?
Not a stone's throw from us stands the lordly Priory of the Holy Trinity; not
far from thence the house of the Crossed Friars; close by that the abbey of the
Nuns of St Clare, while beyond the Minories stretched away those fields which
Stowe traversed in after clays; and, beyond the fields, Ratcliffe swamps. 
Returning through one of the posterns of Aldgate, we arrive again at the Priory
of the Holy Trinity, and find ourselves at once in an aristocratic quarter. 
Here resided Sir Thomas Audley, who, dying in 1544, was succeeded by his
son-in-law, the Duke of Norfolk, from whom "Duke's Place." That narrow alley
which now conducts from Fenchurch Street into Crutched Friars, took its name
from Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland, who had his mansion hard by in the
reign of Henry VI.; and whilst monks and nuns and lords and ladies, were
settling themselves down at this  which was then about the extremest eastern
point of the City  all the road from St Catherine Coleman, where Langbourne
took its rise, was little better than a swamp, to say nothing of the fens and
marshes out by Aldgate, and Moorgate, and Finsbury, which occupied the place of
the lake that once washed the City walls. 
It is not easy to believe in these things now. Thinking of the City as we think
of it at the present day, it seems almost incredible that three hundred years
since, letters for his Grace, the Archbishop of York, were forwarded to Tower
Hill; whilst but half that period has elapsed since a Countess of Devonshire
lived in Devonshire square, Bishopsgate  not in solitude, but surrounded by
much gay company  the last lady of rank who clung to the City. 
There is no need to look scornful about the matter, most beautiful matron,
though you may read this book in a house in Belgravia  for though the City be
unfashionable now, no man may ever blot its ancient glory, or its present power
and strength, out of the page of history. Not all Pickford's waggons can
destroy its romance  not all the ninth of November mummery can efface the
recollection of those days when City pageants were symbols of a real power  not
all the feet that tramp across Tower Hill can obliterate the mournful histories
written on its dust; churches and graveyards, mean courts and narrow alleys,
thronged streets and quiet lanes; there is not one of these but repeats its old
world tale, of misery and joy in the ear of the attentive listener. In the dim
summer twilight we tread softly through the deserted thoroughfare, feeling that
the ground whereon we stand is hallowed  by human suffering  by human courage 
by valour and by woe! 
But, after all, it is around the City churches that the most interesting
memories of olden time cluster. What story is there that the old walls will not
repeat at our bidding? From St Paul's down, each has its own monuments, its own
records  its own separate portion of the narrative of ancient days. Close by
where we are now sitting, are some of these old churches, and, from one and
another, the soft evening breeze brings whispers of the greatness and the sorrow they contain. 
Underneath the high altar of All-Hallows, Barking, lies, crumbling to dust, a
heart which knew no such repose in life . In the same church sleep Surrey the
poet, and bishops Laud and Fisher, who were executed on the adjacent Tower
Hill; whilst a little to the north stands St Katharine Cree, where, in (for
him) more prosperous days, Laud and his fat chaplains laid themselves open to
the sarcasm of Frynne, whose description of the consecration of that church
will be remembered so long as the history of ancient London has any charms for
readers. Near to St Katharine Cree we find St Andrew Undershaft, which brings
with its name thoughts of Spring and May, and garlands and festivity, as well
as sadder memories of the great City historian, who, at eighty years of age,
begged his bread by royal licence, and whose bones were moved from under his
own monument to make way for those of a richer comer. 
Close by there is another All-Hallows, besides Barking, where the Princess
Elizabeth flew to give thanks for her release from the Tower  attracted
thither, so runs the pleasant story, by the joyful ringing of its bells. 
Almost within a stone's throw, what a number of churches there are!  St
Mary-at-Hill, St Dunstan's in the East, St Margaret Pattens, St Catherine
Coleman, Aldgate, St Benet, and St Dionisis Backchurch; whilst just beyond the
wicket gate stood St Gabriel, in the almost forgotten graveyard of which we sit. 
Were all the City houses  all the long lines of streets, all the closely-packed
warehouses, all the overflowing shops swept away, the City churches would still
form a town of themselves. 
Dreaming here, we cannot but marvel what this place was like when both houses
and churches were destroyed  when London was one broad sheet of flame, and its
inhabitants were camped out in the open fields, looking at the ruin which was being wrought. 
Do you not wonder what the congregations were thinking about on that Sunday
morning when the conflagration began? How many were making up their minds about
the removal of their worldly goods  how many thinking of the great and terrible
day of the Lord how many, shivering with fear, thought, to quote the Rev. T.
Vincent, that into those churches which were in flames, "God himself had come
down to preach in them as He did in Mount Sinai, when the mount burst into fire."
Doubtless some of those who sleep inside the rusty railings against which we
lean, beheld these things  saw the City de populated by plague, and purified by
fire  followed the dead carts  looked down into the pits  hurried from the
conflagration   witnessed executions on Tower Hill  attended the theatricals in
the churchyard of St Katharine Cree  and followed royalty, when kings and
queens rode in state through the streets. 
The very stones in this part of London talk to us eloquently of the past. Under
the houses spring the arches of almost for gotten churches  in dim aisles stand
stately monuments  in narrow lanes, mansions once occupied by the nobility. The
dust of great and good, and notorious and suffering men, has mingled long ago
with the earth on which we tread, and there is scarcely an inch of ground but
has some story or tradition connected with it. 
If ghosts could return to their former haunts, what a congress should we behold
in these old world streets! Think of Tower Hill! What a regiment of headless
men and women would draw up there, and march to Westminster to meet the spirits
of their oppressors! Think if the vaults were unsealed, and the graves opened,
and the wrong, and the sin, and the cruelty, and the misery of the past
suffered to escape into the night, what a ghastly procession would meet us at every turning! 
And, as it is, the ghosts we encounter in fancy, while threading the older
parts of London, set us reflecting about the bodies we shall see at the Day of Judgment. 
Giving the imagination leave but to peep into the City churchyards  letting it
have only a glimpse of that horrid foundation on which Windmill Street and the
adjacent thorough fares stand  suffering it to think of the graves lying deep
under the City houses  it is not so difficult to realize what that mighty
gathering will be like when the dead, small and great, shall stand before God,
and be judged according to their works. 
Fen Court is just the place for such pictures to be perfected. We are seated in
the past with its dead, while up the passage comes to us the muffled roar of
the life and traffic of the pre sent. 
We are not looking from the present into the past, we are for the moment
existing in the years gone by. It is the din of our day which is the dream, and
the memories of the olden time that are the reality. 
There is not a sound to dispel the charm  not a footfall to break the silence.
The murmur of the human tide, ebbing and flowing through Fenchurch Street,
disturbs the illusion no more than if it were the thunder of the sea. The few
offices in Fen Court are closed. The children who come here to play have been
in bed this half-hour  the sparrows have chirped themselves to sleep on the
branches overhead. There is a great virtue of stillness stealing down many a
lane and into many a court and alley, for it is now getting dusk in the City,
and the summer twilight brings silence on its quiet wings. 
Unless you know the City well  know it, (I the narrator) mean, in all its moods
and tenses  this statement may well surprise you, for there is a general
impression abroad, that London is never quiet, except it may be from two to
three o'clock A. M., when a comparatively recent writer states that "Riot,
Profligacy, Want, and Misery have retired, and Labour is scarcely risen."
Nevertheless, (I the narrator) repeat my assertion, for the great stillness
which seems suddenly to fall on the City, with the summer semi-darkness, has
always appeared to me little short of marvellous. 
In the winter it is different. Life hurries along the pavements at a quicker
rate under the gas-lamps than under the dull November sky; the traffic of the
day, increased if anything, rolls through the muddy streets; there is no end to
the women one meets going shopping; across the bridges people pour ceaselessly;
omnibuses are crowded; cab horses are whipped into that three-foot gallop which
proclaims the last stage of weariness; St Paul's Churchyard is thronged with
ladies to whom the goods displayed in the shop windows offer attractions
impossible to withstand; behind the counters, pale young men strive with
seductive smiles and graceful arrangements of ribbons and dresses to bring
undecided customers to a decision, whilst in the back streets girls pour out of
work-rooms and fill up the narrow side-paths, with groups of slight,
delicate-looking, thinly clad, giggling chatterers. 
The winter evening brings with its darkness, turmoil and unrest, but the summer
twilight falls softly on silent lanes and empty thoroughfares. The offices are
closed, the shopkeepers have put up their shutters, the human passions, fears,
hopes, joys, and sorrows, that seethed along the pavement during the day, have
been carried by their possessors miles distant, to the far off sea-shore, to
the pleasant Surrey hills, or the green Hertfordshire fields. 
The housekeepers and the City police are left in possession of the City houses
and the City streets, and very gently night steals on, and silence with it. 
Where we sit it is almost dark already, for the houses and the trees make a
shade in Fen Court even at mid-day. Out in the open country, or in the nearer
suburbs, it is probably light enough still; but here, on this August evening,
it is quite dark, and an increasing feeling of solemnity creeps over us as we
sit by the graves in the gloom, whilst the evening breeze stirs softly and
mournfully the leaves above our heads.
 
CHAPTER 2: GRANT AND CO.

Fen Court is far from cheerful now, and except that it was fifteen years
younger  which fact could not have made any material difference in its
appearance  (I the narrator) do not know that it looked any brighter when
George Geith tenanted the second floor of the house which stands next but one
to the old gate way, on the Fenchurch Street side, and transacted business
there, trading under the firm of "Grant and Co., accountants."
If quietness were what he wanted, he had it. Except in the summer evenings,
when the children of the Fenchurch Street housekeepers brought their marbles
through the passage, and fought over them on the pavement in front of the
office doors, there was little noise of life in the old churchyard. The
sparrows in the trees, or the footfall of someone entering or quitting the
Court, alone disturbed the silence. The roar of Fenchurch Street on the one
side, and of Leadenhall Street on the other, sounded in Fen Court but as a
distant murmur; and to a man whose life was spent among figures, and who wanted
to devote his undivided attention to his work, this silence was a blessing not
to be properly estimated save by those who have passed through that maddening
ordeal, which precedes being able to abstract the mind from external
influences, and to keep it steady to one object, in spite alike of the rattle
of a fire engine and the thunder of a railway van. 
For the historical recollections associated with the locality he had chosen,
George Geith did not care a rush. It was the London of to-day in which he lived
and moved and had his being. The London of old was as a sealed book unto him;
and if anyone had opened its pages for his benefit, he would not have read a
line of the ancient story.
Passing every day by places famous in former times, he never paused to inquire
how and when and why they ceased to be of note. In the present he thought of
nothing, cared for nothing, save his business; and for the rest, his dreams,
when he had any, were of the future, not of the past. 
What the past held of his  what of struggle, sorrow, resolve, grief, fear  no
one was ever likely to learn from George Geith. The people with whom he talked
most did not know whence he had come, what he had been, whither he was bound. 
Never a vessel hoisted fewer signals than the accountant. When other men hung
out all their poor rags of colours, when they spread the stories of their lives
out for public inspection, this auditor remained obstinately mute. Not a word
had he to say about home, or friends, or relatives. He made no pretension to
having seen better days  to having ever been anything different from what the
world then saw him  a struggling man, who worked from early in the morning till
late at night, and who seemed to have no thought nor care for anything save
making of money and extending his connection. 
He lived with his work, slept in his back office, ate his breakfast while he
read his letters, and swallowed his tea surrounded on all sides by books and
balance-sheets, and labyrinths and mazes of figures. 
As for his dinner, at whatever hour in the day he could best spare ten minutes,
he went to the nearest coffee-house, and had a chop or steak, as the case might
be. From which it will be clearly seen, that the accountant was not labouring
for creature comforts  for rich dishes and old wines, for soft couches and idle
hours; but that he was working either for work's sake, or for some object far
outside the round of his daily and yearly existence. 
And what an existence that was! What a dull, monotonous road it would have
seemed to most, unrelieved as it was by social intercourse, unlightened by
domestic ties; with no friend to talk to, no wife to love, no child to caress,
no parent to provide for. A lonesome, laborious life, which had little in it
even of change of employment; for, so soon as one man's books were balanced, or
schedule prepared, another merchant or bankrupt stood at the door, and behold,
the same routine had to be gone through again. But monotony did not weary the
accountant. Give him work enough, and strength sufficient to toil eighteen
hours a day, and he was content. If he could have taken more out of himself he
would have done it; but, as that was impossible, he laboured through all the
working days of the week, and up to twelve o'clock on Saturday nights; as (I
the narrator) hope you, my reader, may never have to labour for any cause whatsoever. 
As is the fashion of the Londoners, those who knew Mr Geith  whom they called
Mr Grant  ever so slightly, asked him to come to dinner, tea, supper, what he
would, on Sunday, and because he persistently declined these invitations,
people said the accountant worked seven days in the week on his treadmill in Fen Court. 
But in this instance people were wrong. Whether he were a saint or a sinner,
George Geith still kept the Sabbath day holy, so far as refraining from labour
could keep it so. He put aside his business, and laid down his pen. He went to
church, moreover, in the mornings regularly. Sometimes, too, he walked to
Westminster Abbey, or to St Paul's, for afternoon service; but that was seldom,
for he usually slept until tea; after which meal he started off to one or other
of the City churches, making in this way quite a little visitation of his own
during the course of a twelvemonth. 
A strange life  one so apparently terrible to an outsider in its voluntary
loneliness, that his clients marvelled how he could support it. And yet, my
reader, if (I the narrator) can succeed in putting you on friendly terms with
this solitary individual, you will come gradually to understand why this
existence was not unendurable to him. 
It is getting dark in Fen Court, as we stand beside the railings in the
gathering twilight. The offices have long been closed; the housekeepers'
children have left their marbles and their skipping-ropes, and are gone home to
bed. The twitter of the sparrows is hushed, and there is nothing to be heard
save the faint hum of the city traffic, and the rustling of the leaves, as the
evening breeze touches them caressingly. 
It is getting darker and darker, so dark in fact that there is little more to
be seen of Fen Court to-night; but still, have patience for a moment. This man,
whose story (I the narrator) have under taken to tell as well as I am able, has
just separated himself from the living stream flowing eastward along Fenchurch
Street, and is coming up the passage. You can hear his footsteps ringing
through the silence. Hark! how they echo beneath the archway  quick, firm,
even, unhurried. There is no shadow of turning or wavering about that tread.
Listen to the foot falls; you cannot distinguish the left from the right; there
is no drag, no twist, no irregularity. Do you think the man whom nature has
taught to walk like that would be a person to refrain from using whip and spur
if he had an object to compass? 
I (the narrator) tell you, no. As he passes us in the gloom of the summer
evening, unmindful of the graves lying to his left, and deaf to the low sad
tale the wind is whispering among the leaves, I tell you he is a man to work so
long as he has a breath left to draw; who would die in his harness rather than
give up; who would fight against opposing circumstances whilst he had a drop of
blood in his veins; whose greatest virtues are untiring industry and
indomitable courage, and who is worth half-a dozen ordinary men, if only
because of his iron frame and unconquerable spirit. 
He has let himself in by this time with his latch-key, taken such letters as
are intended for his firm out of the box, and proceeded up the easy,
old-fashioned staircase, past the painting hanging on the first landing, and so
into his own office, where he lights the gas, which, flaring out across the
churchyard, clears a little space for its reflection out of the blackness of the opposite wall. 
Night after night the flare and reflection tell the same tale of patient
labour, of untiring application.
It seems strange that the figures did not dance before his eyes, and chase each
other up and down his desk. With many a one the pence would have nodded across
to the pounds, and the shillings become confused with their neighbours' columns
but the accountant suffered his puppets to take no such liberties. 
In the course of a year he went through miles of addition without a stumble;
what he carried never perplexed him; mid-way up the shillings he never got
crazed as common mortals might, but mounted gallantly to the summit as a racer
goes straight to the winning-post, without a pause.
The skeins of silk which, in the old fairy tale, the godmother gave to her
godchild to disentangle were nothing compared to the arithmetical confusion out
of which George Geith produced order. The chaos of figures from whence he
managed to extract a fair balance-sheet would have seemed hopeless to any
person untrained to passages of arms with the numeration table. 
The mass of accounts through which he waded in the space of twelve months was
of itself almost incredible. Alps on Alps of figures he climbed with silent
patience, and the more Alps he climbed the higher rose great mountains of
arithmetic in the background  mountains with gold lying on their summits for
him to grasp and possess. 
If you would like to see the man who thus laboured through the monotonous
routine of an accountant's daily life, (I the narrator) do not know that any
better opportunity than the present is likely to occur; for, with one foot
stretched wearily on the floor, and the other resting on the rail of his
office-stool, he is sitting beside his desk, with the gaslight streaming full
on his face, sorting out the letters he has just brought up-stairs with him. 
There are eight in all  seven of them he places in a little heap ready to his
hand, whilst the other is pushed on one side till the last. He is not handsome,
certainly! Too common place looking to be the hero of a novel, you object,
perhaps; but you are wrong here. Somehow it is these rough-hewn men who stand
at the helms of the best craft that sail across the ocean of existence. Looking
over the portraits of those who have laboured hardest and longest in the fields
of science, literature, theology, and human progress, we find that nature has
been niggardly with them in the matter of beauty. Possibly the better the
quality of her coin, the less pains she takes in stamping it for the world's
market: but let this be as it may, (I the narrator) would rather accept George
Geith's stern hard face for that of my hero, than have to tell the life's story
of a handsomer man. 
He was fit for the fight he had to wage; and it is something to be permitted to
tell of the struggles of one who, having elected to go down into the battle,
bore the heat and burden of the day, and the agony of the wounds he received
during the conflict, without a murmur.
A man, moreover, who was able to work, not merely fiercely, but patiently; for
whom no task was too long, no labour too severe. Look in his face and see how
it is scored all over with the marks of determination and energy; look at the
square forehead with two deep vertical lines graven on it, at the dark resolute
eyes, at the well-marked unarched brows, at the straight decided nose, at the
nostrils that expand and quiver a little when he is struck hard, as will
sometimes happen in business  the only sign of feeling ever to be traced in his features. 
As for his mouth, were that mass of disfiguring hair away, you would see how
naturally, as his thoughts get to work, his lips compress and harden, not with
the mannerism to be noted in weak women and weaker men, but with that fixed
rigidity of the muscles never to be found save in a person who is strong
mentally and physically; strong in planning, in executing, in loving, in
hating, for good or for evil. 
There are the outward and visible signs of this strength in George Geith, in
his face, in his carriage, in his speech, in his movements. As he now sits
reading his letters, his disengaged hand lies on the desk clenched, as though
he held the purpose and fruition of his life within it. 
There is a significance likewise about the fashion of his beard which he wears
cut and trimmed carefully; not a straggling hair is to be seen in the brown
mass which covers the lower part of his face like a gorse hedge. 
In the days when you, my reader, make this man's acquaintance, hair was no
passport to credit, and people wondered at the accountant's defiance of City
prejudices; but they need not have wondered, for he had suffered his beard to
grow under the same impulse as that which induces a criminal to stain his skin,
and don strange clothes when the police are on his track. In his despair he had
dived into the great sea of London life and when he rose to the surface again
he was so changed that not even the parish clerk of Morelands would have
recognized him, had he seen the accountant sitting under his official nose. 
And yet, seven years before, the Reverend George Geith had been well known at
Morelands; but that was in the days when he was curate there, before the night
when the one great folly of his youth came home to him in all its bitterness,
when he tore the white neckcloth from his throat and flung aside the surplice,
and fled from the Church, to recross her portals, as a servant of God, no more. 
To London he came to seek his fortune. In a feigned name he sought employment,
which he found at last in the offices of Horne Brothers, accountants, Prince's
Street, City. For five weary years he stayed there, wandering through
labyrinths of figures, and applying himself so closely to learn his business
thoroughly, that, when at length he summoned up courage to start on his own
account, he carried with him to Fen Court a very respectable number of clients,
profitable to him, but so small in the estimation of the great house, that
Hornes suffered them to drop through the large meshes of their trade-net without a regret. 
Very patiently he had worked his way on; no business was too paltry or
insignificant for him, and thus it came to pass that one man brought another,
and one transaction led to more. He had succeeded; he was doing well. Let that
suffice for our purpose, without speaking further of the weary toil, of the
incessant labour, by which success had been achieved. 
Even as Jacob served Laban for Rachel, so George Geith was serving fortune for
something which was dear to him as the maid to the patriarch  Freedom. Money
could give him freedom, and accordingly for money he toiled. 
Let the day be never so long, he fainted not; let the heat be never so intense,
he sought no cool shade in which to rest. Onward, ever onward, from early
morning till late at night he hasted, turning not to the right hand nor to the
left; but, keeping the goal of emancipation ever in view, toiled steadily on. 
People marvelled how he was able to continue the pace, but they did not know of
the whip which was lashing him on. If he were ever to taste the sweets of
liberty; if he were ever to resume his proper name and his rightful station in
the future, he must work like a slave in the present. 
And as a traveller, when seeking some far-off land of golden promise, pauses
not to seek rest or companions, in the country through which he is passing, so
George Geith, hurrying on his road to freedom, took no heed of the roughness
and loneliness of the path he was traversing. 
Money was what he lacked; money what he hoped to gain; and rocks and stones
seemed like smoothest turf under his feet whilst he pressed onward to obtain it. 
"A few years more," he had been thinking, as he came up the passage, "a few
years more, and I shall have enough to free myself."And then he entered the
house, as we have seen. 
When he had finished reading his other letters, the accountant lifted that he
first laid aside, and slowly turned it over with the air of a person who
expected no pleasure to result from the perusal. It was directed to Grant &
Co., Accountants, Fen Court, Fenchurch Street, City; and the man who opened the
letter, knew it came from the only person in London who could say, for a
certainty, that the Rev. George Geith was living, and in England. 
As no pleasant news had ever come, or was ever likely to come, to Fen Court
through his instrumentality, the accountant pulled out the contents of the
envelope leisurely. Within the outer cover there was an enclosure directed to
the Rev. George Geith, which enclosure contained three documents, viz., a note,
a letter, and a telegraphic message. The last Mr Geith read the first, and as
he did so his face altered in a moment. 
Energy, firmness, and impassiveness were struck out of it at once by surprise,
by an amazement which made him feel like one reading in his sleep. There was no
further hesitation after that. He tore open the letter to see what the message
really meant; he seized the note and glanced at the few lines it contained.
After that he turned to the telegram once again, and read and re-read it, till
the words danced before his eyes. 
Was it true?  was he free? Had death done for him, in an instant, that which it
would have taken years of work, and all the money he could have earned by work,
to have accomplished. 
Was it certain that this great deliverance had been effected  that the incubus
of his life was removed; that the shackles were struck off, and the prison-door
opened, and he at liberty to walk forth into that fair land of freedom which he
had left so long, so long ago? 
For a moment the accountant covered his face with his hands, and sat with his
eyes shut, to assure himself, when he opened them again, he had not been
dreaming. Then he read the note and the letter and the telegram once more, and
after he had read, he went for a moment into his back office, whence he
returned carrying the clerical directory in his hand. 
He wanted to see if the name of the clergyman, whose letter lay before him, was
to be found in the book. Very eagerly he ran his finger down the page: Claell,
Clafield, Claike, Clarke, Claull, Claydon, Clayfield, (clergyman Arthur),
Clayfield, Charles M., Clayfield Francis  yes, there he was at last; Clayfield,
Honourable Ferdinand G., Vicar of Lute, St Austills, Trevannick, Cornwall. 
He was a reality, then. The thick note-paper, the clerically illegible
handwriting, the large seal and imposing crest, had concealed no deception,
covered no snare. The person who had cursed his life was dead, and he by consequence free. 
Having arrived at which conclusion, the accountant took off his neckcloth, and
unfastened his shirt-collar. Each man has his own especial way of evincing
happiness, and that was Mr Geith's. 
Further, if he had not done something of the kind he must have suffocated; even
as it was he felt his veins were not large enough to let the blood pour through
them. His head seemed full of pain, the gaslight flickered and danced before
his eyes, and as he left the desk and walked across the room to his
writing-table, he staggered like a drunken man. 
And truly the news he had just received was enough to shake the firmness of any
one. A man cannot pass from one existence into another without a throe, and the
change which had taken place in George Geith's life was like nothing save
passing from the darkness of the valley of the shadow of death, back into the
glorious noon-day of life, and hope, and youth. 
Between the chimes of the clock, liberty had come through the passage, and
along the churchyard, and up the stairs, to sit down beside the accountant in
his lonely office. At nine he was a slave, at a quarter past nine, free, and
striving with a gasp to realize that he was so. 
How poor and insignificant any deliverance he could have wrought out for
himself in the days to come, seemed to this!  It was like what filing through
chains of iron with a rusty rail might be in comparison to having the fetters
struck off with a smith's sledge. Death had emancipated him, and he was glad.
In that hour he had no pity to spare for the sinner departed; no prayer to
mutter for the soul called so suddenly to its account. 
George Geith was neither a very sensitive nor a very scrupulous man; he was
fitted to fight out his fight bravely, but without much compunction, and so he
never thought of mingling a regret with his joy, or of baring his head and
humbling himself in the dust whilst the chariot of the Lord rolled by. Through
the portals of eternity, held open for a moment by the hand of death, he never
turned to gaze; he only looked out over the future of his own life, which he
was now free to travel as he pleased. 
How he travelled it, what he made of it, how the bitter folly of his youth
mingled with his cup when it tasted the sweetest and seemed full to the brim
with happiness and content, you shall know, reader, if you have patience to
follow his fortunes through the pages to come. 
Meanwhile he has gone over to his desk again, and, having put aside his
letters, got to work. We may go out of the office now and leave him to himself. 
CHAPTER 3. BUSINESS. 

Over all sorts of human feelings, the Juggernaut of business rolls
relentlessly. It spares neither sorrow nor joy in its progress; and there are
no smiles so bright, no tears so bitter that they can drag, even for a moment,
the wheels of that in exorable car. Let the sickness be never so fatal, let the
dead in her coffin have been never so dear, still if business is to go on at
all, the sick must be left and the dead forsaken, and the merest details of
every-day commercial life attended to, though a man's heart should be breaking.
Money must be lodged and paid, bills met, goods sent for shipment, letters
answered, customers admitted, though the eyes that were wont to light up the
now desolate home are closed, and the voice which made melody in the deserted
rooms is mute for ever. Shall sorrow stop the trains, keep vessels in the dock,
prevent office doors being opened? No, surely; nor shall joy, not even such joy
as George Geith felt when he opened his eyes on the following morning, and
satisfied himself by another perusal of his letter that the liberty which had
come to him the previous night was not a dream. Whether bond or free, it was
necessary he should live, and so he thankfully turned himself to business once
again, and remained in Fen Court, working as hard, and as fiercely, as ever. 
Most men who had been bred up to the church, and compelled to leave it solely
by the pressure of external circumstances, would, when once that pressure was
withdrawn, have seriously considered whether they ought not to return to their old profession. 
Not so George Geith, however. He did not feel the old vows bind him. He
acknowledged no obligation to return to curate's work and curate's pay. He had
settled the matter of relinquishing the Church years ago with his own
conscience, and although circumstances were much altered since then, he was not
the man to reopen a disagreeable controversy with himself, and resume an
argument in which, free as he was in the present to choose his course, he would
have been sure to get the worst of the discussion. The years which had brought
liberty with them had brought likewise a knowledge of his own aptitude for
business, and inaptitude for parish work. In the days when he was compelled to
make his decision, it had seemed to him a calamity to have to leave the Church;
but now the calamity would be to have to return to the Church, to relinquish
the busy world of business and profit, the future of wealth and independence,
for some country parish, where he should have to try to please the village
gossips, be deferential to his rector, christen the labourers' children, bury
the poor, and marry those whose banns had first been duly published. 
It was not a temporal lot to be coveted by a man of his temperament; and as
temporal advantages were the gods of George Geith's idolatry; as loaves and
fishes were much more to his taste than any form of spiritual refreshment that
could be offered him; as he had in the first instance decided to be a clergyman
solely because his father (adolphus geith) had been one, because his friends
wished it, and because there was a desirable living in the Geith family, it
will readily be believed that having found there was a more excellent worldly
way to rank and wealth and ease, he was not likely to return to the path he had
abandoned, and become either a poor curate, with good connections certainly,
but without private means, or the hanger-on of a great house, the windows
whereof commanded a view of the smoke curling up from the chimneys of Great Snareham Rectory. 
From the clerical directory he knew that the old incumbent (mr hetton) was
still alive; and he knew, likewise, that his aunt, Lady Geith, and his cousin,
Sir Mark, would give him the living whenever it fell in, and settle the
question of his sudden flight from Morelands, and long absence from the Church,
with the Bishop, whilst that dignitary ate his luncheon at Snareham Castle. 
It was no doubt about his old advantages being restored to him that kept George
Geith in Fen Court. It was just this  he liked business better than preaching,
or praying, or visiting the fatherless and widows in their affliction; and
accordingly, without arguing out the matter, or giving it more than the most
casual consideration, he decided on remaining an accountant. And if a
clergyman's engagement with the Church be dissoluble, if it be but a matter of
service and payment, of temporal expediency and earthly reward, he was right.
But on the other hand, if entering the Church be marrying- for time and
eternity, if the vows vowed are irrevocable, if the choice, once made, whether
hastily or after mature consideration, be one by which a man ought to abide
through life, he was wrong. Anyhow, he remained in Fen Court, and that may
suffice for us, for it is not with the tender scruples of a sensitive man we
shall have to do in these volumes, not with the self-analysis of a subjective
nature, but rather with the life's fight of one who now victorious, now
defeated, struggled on till he reached the summit of his hopes, a disappointed man!
See him as he sits in his office, looking over his desk at the waving boughs
and the rustling leaves that dance and are glad in the summer sunshine! Life is
before him, and he is free. 
He has lost years and years certainly, but at thirty-two a man has still the
best part of his life to traverse, and he who can start from that point with
nothing to hinder his making a good thing of the remainder of the road, may
truly be esteemed one of the favourites of fortune. 
And this man? He has health, a clear conscience, a strong body, a vigorous mind. 
He is willing to work, and has got work to do; he is succeeding in his
profession; he can resume his old name. He can, if he pleases, seek out his
relatives, and establish a connection between the City and one of the oldest
and proudest families in Bedfordshire. Or, if he did not care to do that, he
could at any rate walk about the world a free and independent man, dogged no
more by the dread of discovery; and he could work with a light heart, knowing
what he earned was his own, and would never again have to be laid aside and
devoted to that purpose which had eaten seven years out of the very heart and glory of his life. 
Now, come friend, come foe, George Geith was indifferent. The one enemy who
could have beggared and disgraced him was lying at last in a churchyard, far
away in Cornwall. After seven years  seven years that had altered every plan of
his life, obliterated the prejudices of birth, taken him out of the Church, and
flung him into the midst of a struggling, pushing world, to fight for his daily
bread, George Geith was free. 
Seven years! what would the next seven bring to him? For days the accountant
asked himself that question; as he walked along the streets, as he ate his
breakfast, and swallowed his dinner; he saw, not the crowds in the City
thoroughfares. not his dingy back office, not the blank formality of Billiter
Square, not the comfortless surroundings of the dirty chop house; but estates,
and houses, and happiness, all possessed by George Geith, who, with grave face
and sober demeanour, saw visions and dreamed dreams! 
What business man has not done this? Who, standing on the borders of that
speculative land, which is so fair to all, and which holds gifts for so few,
has not bought and sold, and sowed and reaped, and laboured, and received abundantly?
Talk of the imagination of poets; what are their wildest fancies in comparison
to those which fill the brains of speculators? 
And this is the true fascination of business. Beyond its weary details, beyond
its toils, beyond its certainties, beyond its endless necessities and countless
annoyances, lies the limit less region of possibility, which is possessed in
fancy by thousands who (might seem to you, my reader, commonplace men enough. 
That land is boundless, beautiful, happy. It is the El Dorado of struggling
men, the heaven of inventors; it is the sun which shines into dingy offices,
which gilds dark clouds that would otherwise overwhelm with their blackness
tired and anxious hearts. 
Into this land the minds of silent and undemonstrative men pass the most
readily. And it was because George Geith was to a great extent self-contained
and unconfiding, that he clothed the future with such glorious hues and radiant apparel. 
And yet as this future had to be won with work, the glimpses he caught of it,
instead of inducing idleness, only made him labour more determinedly in the present. 
There was nothing in the prospect of rest which caused him to loathe his
harness. At sight of the distant pastures, and the far-off streams, he merely
quickened his pace onward. 
Every step he took over the City stones, every letter he wrote, every piece of
business he completed, brought the end closer, the journey nearer to a conclusion. 
Freed from the danger of detection, George Geith once again made himself a bondsman. 
Never a master lashed on a slave to labour as business now lashed on the
accountant. It drove him, it hurried him, he lived in it and for it, far more than he lived by it. 
He had worked so long fiercely, that his mind seemed cramped unless his body
was always labouring a little beyond its strength. The object for which he had
toiled was gone, but it is easy to install a pleasant object in the place of an
unpleasant one; and so for wealth instead of for freedom he began to labour,
and soon every faculty was stretched in the race he had set himself to run. 
He had not a near relation living. Without wife, child, father or mother,
sister or brother, he slaved for himself, as few men slave for their families.
He made a god out of that which was sapping his health and strength; and he
fell down and worshipped it, day after day, and night after night, whilst the
wind sobbed among the leaves of the trees, and the dead, who, it might be, had
some of them worshipped Mammon too, slept inside the rusty railings forgotten and forsaken. 
So passed the autumn, and it was winter. The finest season of the year had
departed, and George Geith was glad. The most profitable time was at hand  and
the footsteps of clients, old and new, made pleasant music in the accountant's
ear, as they ascended the stairs, leading to his second floor. 
Bankrupts, men who were good enough, men who were doubtful, and men who were
(speaking commercially) bad (bad businessmen), had all alike occasion to seek
the accountant's advice and assistance. Retailers, who kept clerks (retailers'
clerks) for their sold books, but not for their bought; wholesale dealers
(wholesale dealers' clerks), who did not want to let their clerks see their
books at all; shrewd men of business, who yet could not balance a ledger;
ill-educated traders, who, though they could make money, would have been
ashamed to show their ill- written and worse-spelled journals to a stranger;
unhappy wretches shivering on the brink of insolvency; (client creditors) who
did not think much of the cooking of some dishonest debtor's accounts  all
these came and sat in George Geith's back office, and waited their turn to see him. 
First come, first served, was the accountant's rule in business; and one which
(I the narrator) rather think contributed largely to his success. One of the
blood-royal would not in that office have taken precedence of John Oakes and
Tom Styles; and it is these latter gentlemen who, after all, are more
profitable customers than the Upper Ten Thousand, if tradespeople could only think so. 
Country gentry indeed, who came to the City by rail, and west-end folks who
made the City more crowded with their cabs, were somewhat disgusted at a
regulation which failed to recognise their superiority over the east-end herd;
but never was any one more indignant than an individual (Ambrose Molozane) who,
having made a journey to town solely on purpose to visit the office of Grant
and Co., found himself left in the background, whilst common people were
ushered into the presence chamber  vulgar people evidently in trade, who, the
clerk would have hinted to any less stately customer, were a "muslin, two teas, and a cheese."
But this tall, portly country gentleman, who stood looking out at the drizzling
rain which was wetting the pavement of Billiter Square, would not have
understood what he meant, and would not have smiled at the description if he
had; and it was quite a relief to the (clerk 1) when he knew, by the closing of
the other office door, that the stranger's turn had come at last. 
"Mr Geith is at leisure now, sir," said the youth (clerk 1), and he rose and
opened the door of communication for the new client to pass through. Had the
new client been of an observant nature he might have- noticed that to the rest
(george's clients) the clerk had merely nodded permission to enter; but,
wrapped up in his own affairs, he only remembered that others had obtained an
audience before him, and so entering the inner office with the air of an
injured man, opened the pleadings as follows. 
CHAPTER 4. THE SYTHLOW MINES. 
"I have been kept waiting; I have been detained above an hour," he said, and
from his manner of saying it Mr Geith saw that waiting had not improved his temper. 
"I am sorry," answered the accountant, "that it has so happened, but my rule is
that the first comer sees me first. We business men," he explained, "cannot
afford to be other than democrats, and the peer and the peasant stand on an
equality in a City office, if they bring work in their hands with them."
"I dare say your rule is a good one," was the reply, uttered in a tone which
implied that the introduction of a general proposition into a conversation with
the speaker (Ambrose Molozane) was too pre sumptuous to be pleasing. "I dare
say your rule is a good one, though it has occasioned inconvenience to myself.
I came from Hertfordshire this morning in order to see Mr Grant?"
"My name is Geith," said George, answering the implied question; "but it is all
the same, I manage the business."
"But I wanted to see Mr Grant," replied the visitor (Ambrose Molozane), looking
all round the room as if in search of that mythical individual. "I wish to
consult him on a matter of some importance and "
"I assure you Mr Grant is never here," interposed the accountant. "I am the
managing partner in the firm, and as such have the sole conduct of all affairs
that may be intrusted to us. If you will tell me the nature of your business I
shall be most happy to advise you to the best of my ability." And Mr Geith,
having first handed his visitor a chair, mounted his stool, and looked
attentively at his new client, who in turn stared hard at him. 
It was very little the accountant could discover from his scrutiny beyond the
fact of the new-comer being a gentleman, which fact he had ascertained the
moment he entered the room. 
A florid, middle-aged, blue-eyed, light-haired, hot-tempered individual, who
looked like a country squire, but who might have been anything, from a nobleman
to a small landed-proprietor. George could not conceive what his important
business might be, so he waited till the other had completed his survey and
intimated that he felt comparatively satisfied with the appearance of the
accountant by announcing himself to be "Mr Molozane."
Mr Geith had some vague recollection of having heard of an old and respectable
county family of that name, and acknowledged the information with suitable respect. 
"Having some money lying idle," proceeded Mr Molozane, "I thought I would call
and ask your opinion of the Sythlow Mines."
"Our business has no connection with mines," replied the accountant. "You would
probably gain the information you require from a mining engineer."
"What do I want with mining engineers?" broke out Mr Molozane. "What do I want
with a parcel of fellows who would recommend anything for the sake of their
commission? I require a disinterested opinion  an opinion on which I can depend."
"It would be impossible for me to offer one," said Mr Geith: "for, in the first
place, we are merely accountants, and, in the second, I never heard of the Sythlow Mines before."
"But you could ascertain particulars."
"I doubt it," was the reply; "and even if I could, I should decline interfering
in the matter. It is out of our line altogether."
"You have come in contact with mines, though," urged Mr Molozane. 
"With those who have been ruined by them, yes," returned Mr Geith. He was sorry
next moment for having spoken the words, for he saw the strong man wince at
them  wince and shiver. 
"Had you not better consult your solicitor? "he continued, becoming interested
in spite of himself in his visitor. 
"I have no solicitor in London, and I do not want my man of business in the
country to know anything about the matter. The truth is " and here Mr Molozane
left his chair and came and stood beside the accountant's desk  "the truth is,
I have taken shares in those cursed mines, and I have come to you to know
whether they will bring ruin to me or not."
"Why to me? "asked George, in amazement. 
"Because a sort of cousin of mine told me Grant and Co. were to be depended on.
I dare say you remember him, Mr Croft, a clergyman."
George Geith did. He remembered the rev. gentleman getting himself into
pecuniary trouble, and coming to that very office three or four times a day to
see "how he stood." He remembered he had often wished Mr Croft far enough, and
he now began to marvel whether Mr Molozane would prove another such infliction.
While this passed through his mind he said -
"How can I possibly do what you wish? My business lies among certainties, not
possibilities. I am no judge of mines. There is only one thing I do know, which
is, that I should never invest one sixpence in them."
"Is a man liable to the extent of his shares?" was Mr Molozane's comment on this speech. 
"Certainly. And if the company be not on the cost principle he is liable to the
extent of the company's liabilities. Is yours on the cost principle?"
"I am sure I cannot tell," said the dupe, faintly, "I know nothing about it
except that they told me I should never have to pay more than the first
instalment unless I chose, and that I should be able at any time to sell at a
hundred per cent. profit."
"How many shares have you? "asked the accountant. 
"One hundred, fifty-pound shares," was the reply. 
"How much paid up? "
"Twenty pounds."
"What are they selling at now? "
"Half-a-crown; a temporary depression in the market, they say, but I cannot help feeling uneasy."
"Sell at half-a-crown," said Mr Geith, on receipt of this intelligence. "Sell
at any price, and get rid of them."
"Why, five minutes ago, you stated you knew nothing of the Sythlow mines; that
you had never heard of them. I do not understand your meaning, sir, not at
all;" and the poor gentleman, who felt the ground giving way under his feet, stood at bay. 
"My meaning is this," answered Mr Geith, who could not feel offended at
anything a man so placed might say; "that a company which induces the public to
purchase shares by misrepresentation, and the fifty-pound shares in which are
selling at half-a-crown, must be rotten, and the sooner you get clear of it the better."
"But I should lose nineteen hundred and eighty-seven pounds," said Mr Molozane,
with a readiness which proved he had gone through the calculation before; "and
to think of the sum I expected to make  of all the plans I built on that d-d
lead! I cannot give everything up, Mr Geith  I cannot sell."
For a moment the accountant paused and hesitated before he said: "As I
understand, the case stands thus. You have accepted an indefinite liability
which you can get rid of at the cost of a definite loss; were I so situated, I
should submit to the loss, rather than continue the liability. You know to-day
that nineteen hundred and eighty-seven pounds odd will be the extent of your
misfortune, but you have no means of knowing what sum it will take to set you straight hereafter."
"You think, in fact, the mine might swallow up all I have?" asked Mr Molozane,
with a ghastly attempt at a smile. 
"It is possible," answered the accountant, and his visitor resumed his chair. 
"Could you ascertain what the mines are thought of in London?" said Mr Molozane
after a time, with that vague belief in the value and safety of metropolitan
opinion, which is so distinguishing a peculiarity of country people. 
"Probably I could," was the reply. "I will endeavour to do so to-morrow, and
communicate the result."
"To-day, sir, to-day, for God's sake!" urged his client; and thus exhorted,
George Geith wrote on a slip of paper  
"Dear Sir,  Can you send me any information about the Sythlow Mines? Are they a
safe investment; who is the secretary, and how does the company stand? 
"Yours, G. G."
This slip he told his clerk (clerk 1) to take over to Mr Bemmidge's office in
Nicholas Lane, and wait an answer.
Having done this, he handed The Times to Mr Molozane, and commenced writing
letters that were to go out by that night's mail. 
Whilst he was so engaged, people who had entered the outer office (george's
clients), and found no one there, knocked at the inner door for admittance.
Then the accountant called out, "Come in," and laying down his pen, listened to
what they had to say; or if the business proved of a private nature, went into
the other office with them. 
As a rule, he did not leave either friend or stranger alone in his own sanctum;
but he felt no fear of Mr Molozane scrutinizing his papers. The unfortunate
shareholder evidently did not belong to that class of persons who cannot let a
chance pass of examining into the state of other men's affairs, let their own
anxiety be what it will.
Wearily the minutes passed to the visitor. He would have liked to lay down The
Times and pace the room, but he feared disturbing Mr Geith. The great silence
of the place  that silence of London, which is so much more intense than
silence in the country  wore him out. 
Through the silence, the clock above the door ticked on relentlessly, and Mr
Molozane listened to the sound till it seemed as though his heart were ticking
too, louder and faster than the clock.
When strangers (george's clients) entered he screened his face with the
newspaper, and tried to help hearing what they said. 
When they left, he looked out of the window near which he sat, at the blackened
walls surrounding the old churchyard, and the trees which grew within the
railings, and waved their branches mournfully to the dull sky, whilst the rain
kept drip, dripping on to the damp graves beneath. 
At last the clerk (clerk 1) came back, stating in explanation of his long
absence, that Mr Bemmidge, after reading the note, went out  telling him to
wait. On his return he gave the messenger the fly-leaf of an old letter twisted
up, with these words written in pencil on it - 
"The Sythlow shares are not worth the value of the paper on which they are
issued. Don't let any one you know invest in them. The company is not on the
cost-book principle, and the secretary is Punt. I need say no more."
"Why need he say 'no more?'" asked Mr Molozane, as the accountant concluded. 
"Because there is not a greater scoundrel in London," was the reply. "You must
not lose an hour; you must sell whilst selling is possible."
"Give me a glass of water," said Mr Molozane, and Mr Geith requested his clerk
(clerk 1) to bring some, which he did, in a jug; carrying it and a tumbler in on a waiter. 
When he had emptied the jug, Mr Molozane rose, and taking out his purse with a
hand that would tremble spite of all his efforts at composure, said  "I do not
know how much I am your debtor, but if you will"
"You are not my debtor at all," interrupted the accountant; "mines are not our
business, and I have done no business for you I only wish I could have given
you better news. Nay," he added, "I cannot make a charge. I might just as well
take a fee for telling a stranger his way to St Paul's."
"You are very good. I fear I have intruded most unwarrantably; I am sorry  l am
greatly obliged;" and Mr Molozane held out his hand in a manner which proved he
was only paying Mr Geith in civility because he declined payment in money. 
There could be no doubt but that Mr Molozane thought shaking hands with a man
in business was conferring an honour on the individual so favoured.
Many a person reading this thought would have resented the condescension, but
the accountant pitied his visitor too much for that, and shook hands cordially. 
"Your broker will be too late to sell to-day," he remarked, "but you might
instruct him to dispose of the shares tomorrow."
"I do not know any broker," said Mr Molozane, dolefully. 
"Nor do I personally," was the reply. "Smart and Stewart, in Broad Street, are
considered very respectable people; you could scarcely do better than go to them."
"Thank you;" and Mr Molozane was about to depart, when George asked him if he
knew his way to Broad Street. 
The misguided man of course did not, but meant to inquire, and expressed
himself gratefully when the accountant told him "to turn to his right on
getting out of Fen Court, and keep straight on to the end of Fenchurch Street.
After that," proceeded Mr Geith, "turn to your right again up Gracechurch
Street, cross the first opportunity, and take the second turning to your left,
which is Threadneedle Street; Broad Street is the first turning to your right
going down Threadneedle Street."
All of which directions Mr Molozane followed, and got safe into Broad Street;
but there he lost himself and got into Austinfriars, where he floundered about
for a while, and finally turned up in Great Winchester Street. 
At that point some benevolent individual took him in charge,  conveyed him back
to Broad Street via London Wall, and deposited him at the door of Messrs. Smart
and Stewart's office. 
"Want shares sold out of the Sythlow Mining Co.! "repeated Mr Smart, who was a
little old man with white hair, a sharp nose, and spectacles; "you are not
singular, but it cannot be done. We could not get rid of them for you if we
offered a premium for taking them. Very sorry to hear you have shares; a bad
business  very;" and Mr Smart, taking snuff, offered his box to Mr Molozane. 
It was a poor way, perhaps, of evincing sympathy, but he really intended the pinch as consolatory. 
He was very sorry to hear that portly-looking country gentleman had shares in
the undertaking, for he knew well enough that to the majority of those who were
so unfortunate, there was an end coining, which end was  ruin. 
CHAPTER 5. A FRIENDLY INVITATION. 

The letters were written and posted; the clerk (clerk 1) had taken down his
great-coat, tied a white comforter in many folds round his neck, brushed his
hat with his sleeve, and departed, shutting the outer door of the house after
him, and George Geith was at last alone and free to linger a few minutes over
his tea. From first thing in the morning he had been listening, talking,
writing, or walking. He had not found leisure for any dinner, so he was
breaking his fast with a chop the housekeeper (Mrs Grimsby) had cooked for him,
when a loud knock resounded through the house, and next moment Mr Bemmidge entered the room. 
"Don't let me interrupt you," he said, taking off his hat and unbuttoning his
top-coat as he spoke. What a night it is! The rain is coming down as if you
were pouring it out of buckets. Thank you, I will take a cup of tea; shall I call Mrs Grimsby?"
But Mrs Grimsby, who knew Mr Bemmidge's ways, was already in the room with a
second cup and saucer, having placed which articles on the table she waited for
the teapot, and departed in triumph to replenish it. 
"Bachelor's tea, Bemmidge," said Mr Geith apologetically to his friend, who had
by this time planted himself in front of the fire, with both feet on the fender. 
"Always good," replied Mr Bemmidge. "I think there ought to be an especial
clause in the marriage service, securing a strong cup to married men."
"One would think Mrs Bemmidge treated you badly in that respect," remarked the accountant. 
"So she does, but not worse than other wives treat their husbands; indeed, tea
is the only thing we ever have a row about. It's strange, isn't it? Mothers can
make tea, and sisters too, but wives can't; and yet one would think they must
have been sisters once, and will someday be the mothers of great hulking boys.
Ah! when I was single and in lodgings, used not I to make the tea black? It was
like ink. Some fellows that came to see me then (mr bemmidge's old friends)
will talk about my tea yet. I had to ask them not to mention it before Mrs B.,
for it set her back up regularly; and as she is as good a wife as ever
breathed, it is a shame to vex her. What fires you do keep up, to be sure!" and
Mr Bemmidge thrust the poker between the bars as though the heat were not fierce enough already. 
"And what about the mines? "he added. 
"Do you mean, was the information sufficient? "asked Mr Geith. "If so, it is a
little too sufficient for the person on whose behalf I made the inquiry (Mr
Molozane); he had taken shares."
"Poor devil! "ejaculated Mr Bemmidge; "he may put up his shutters."
"I don't think that he is in any business," said the accountant. "Has private
means, I should imagine."
"If I were in his shoes, then, I should sell my sticks, pack up, and bolt,"
observed Mr Bemmidge. "The Sythlow Mines will be the worst smash-up that we
have seen for years. Mark my words if they are not. Do you know, I got quite in
a fidget lest it was on your own behalf you were inquiring, and that my advice
should not be strong enough to hinder your taking the shares as bargains. You
ought to write to your client, and advise him to decamp."
"I do not know what the man is," answered the other, "or where he lives, or
anything about him (Mr Molozane), except that I am sure he would not do as you
suggest. He will either shoot himself or face the evil. He will not run away."
"Then, unless he is remarkably lucky, he will have to be content with a front
seat in the workhouse," said Mr Bemmidge; and having sketched this pleasant
future for Mr Molozane, he swallowed another cup of tea, and pushed his chair a
little further from the fire.
"I have come to ask you to do me a favour," he began, after a pause. "No, not
that," he added hastily, as Mr Geith rose to get his cheque-book. "Not that,
though you have helped me over many an ugly stile. I want you to eat your
Christmas dinner with us. Everything plain  no formality  all old friends. A
dance and a rubber. You are such an unsociable fellow that I scarcely liked to
ask you, only that Mrs B. would have it. In fact, she said, 'If you do not
bring Mr Grant, I must fetch him myself.'"
"Mrs Bemmidge is extremely kind," said the accountant. 
"Not a bit of it. We are all wanting to have you. Even my little girl (Amy
Bemmidge) is always asking when I am going to bring Mr Rant home."
"What makes you call me Grant, Bemmidge? "asked the accountant as coolly as
though he had never assumed the name. 
"What makes me call you Grant? "repeated Mr Bemmidge, turning his soft,
womanish eyes on his friend in amazement. "What do you mean? What else should I call you? "
"Geith. I am not Grant, but the Co."
"And who is Grant? "
"My principal!" and Mr Geith said this as soberly as a judge. 
"The deuce he is; and why is he never here? "
"You might as well have asked me ten minutes since why you never saw the Co."
"I always thought the Co. a myth," was the frank reply. 
"And, on the same principle, you think Grant a myth now, I suppose," suggested the accountant. 
"No," said Mr Bemmidge; "no, I don't; I believe in Grant, and that he makes you
work as if you had not another day to live. Have not I hit the [generic mark] now? "
"Pretty nearly; for years I have worked for Grant, but now, I may tell you in
confidence, I am working for myself. I shall keep on the name of the firm, of
course; but I am really my own master."
"That is right; that is as it should be. But now, look here, Geith, or whatever
your name is, everybody calls you Grant, except this new clerk (clerk 1) of
yours, and I never could make out what the deuce he was saying."
"And everybody is welcome to call me Grant," retorted the accountant; "I can't
stop to explain to all the people who come here, that I am not Grant; and if I
did, I should have them discontented at the idea of being attended to by a
subordinate. I have tried it, and don't mean to trouble myself about the matter
anymore. Geith, or Grant, what is the difference? Cain or Abel, Jones or
Thompson, it is all one to me."
"But in case of property being left to you? "
"Left to me! "scoffed George; "when did you ever hear of property being left to
a man living in a back office, and who works like a dray-horse? But even so, I
could prove my identity. And, if you come to that, Bemmidge, how many men in
London are trading under their own names? How many men are known to their
business acquaintances by the names their fathers bore before them? Junior
partners, surviving partners, new beginners, all pass for other and more
important people than they are. Take your own case, Bemmidge, who is your Co.?
Is he a man of capital, or a mere dummy, who represents what you wish in your
soul you possessed? Or is it Mrs Bemmidge, or your little girl (Amy Bemmidge)? "
"You hit me hard," answered the wine merchant; "my Co. is but a graceful ending
to a name that would look a little bald in advertising. Andrew Bemmidge and
Company certainly sounds fuller than Andrew Bemmidge by itself; but then, I am
Bemmidge, and you are not Grant."
"Very true; but what difference does that make? There is a firm you do business
with, Rankin, Runcorn, and Smith; what is the name of the partner you see? "
"Rankin, I believe."
"You are wrong, then, there is but one man in the firm, and his name is
Jackson. There is a perfumer in Bishopsgate called Hume, and he trades under
the firm of Lepard and Holini. As you go down Mincing Lane, you must have
noticed a great brass plate with Huggins, Son, Huggins, and Holt, on it. For a
long time I thought that genuine, but one day I discovered the sole
representative of that house to be a Mr Black, who lives down at Grays. He came
into the business through being the son-in-law of Huggins' son; but he does not
think it expedient to change the name of the old firm, nor do I. I shall be
Grant and Co. till the end of my tenancy, and those who like to call me Grant may do so."
"But you want me to call you Geith"
"When a man asks me to his house," began George, "it changes the position. I
could not accept your invitation if "
"Then you will come. Thank you a hundred times; I shall make Mrs Bemmidge's
heart happy, spite of the anxieties of impending plum-pudding. Thank you," and
Mr Bemmidge wrung the accountant's hand. "Let me see, what is your name? Just
spell it for me, there's a good fellow."
"I will give you a card," said George, and he pulled one he had recently had
engraved out of his purse. "What time do you dine six o'clock? "
"Six! Lord, bless me, no! Three, sharp; but come at two  come at one."
"I could not do it," was the answer; "it will be as much as I can manage to get
up to your house at three o'clock. Service won't be over in any of the City
churches much before half-past one."
"You don't mean to say you go to church, and that kind of thing, and you a bachelor, too."
"Have not bachelors souls? "asked Mr Geith, with praiseworthy gravity.
"Yes, I suppose so; but it seems singular. One expects married people to be
religious, and so forth. Indeed, I often say to Mrs Bemmidge myself, that when
the children (bemmidge children) grow up we must begin  we must, really. You
have surprised me. I always thought that because you would not come up to us,
that you had it out on Sundays."
"Had what out? "asked George, who was for once fairly mystified. 
"Had your sleep. Unless I am going out of town, I never rise on Sundays till
twelve or one; so I fancied you, perhaps, did not get up till three or four."
"That is making it a day of rest with a vengeance," remarked the accountant. 
"What should I do if I did get up?" was the reply. "Really you have astonished
me! you go to church even on Christmas day. Mrs Bemmidge's mother will be
delighted. She is always scolding because we don't attend to those things as
she does. You see it is entirely a matter of constitution," finished Mr
Bemmidge, and George Geith did not contradict the statement. He contented
himself with shaking hands over again with his friend, assuring him he would be
punctual, and remember the address.
Ivy Cottage, Holloway Road, "near the Archway Road," were Mr Bemmidge's
farewell words, ere he plunged out again into the pelting rain which came
splashing down, and making dreary puddles in the graveyard. 
For a minute George Geith's eyes followed him; then the accountant drew back
into the house and closed the door, and ascended to his office thoughtfully. 
"Now, I wonder what the deuce possessed me," he marvelled, as he stood before
his fire; "I wonder what possessed me to say I would go. Have I not spent
enough Christmas-days alone to be able to face another?" and George Geith
looked at the blaze that went leaping up the chimney, while he asked himself
these questions. Seven times had the twenty-fifth of December come round since
he left Morelands, and seven times had he passed the day with no other company
save his own thoughts. In lodgings he had sat reading in solitary state while
screams of laughter came ringing up that staircase, and the house shook with
the dancing and romping of his landlady's guests assembled in the first floor
front. He could still see that landlady, all "brass and glass," sailing into
his room, short, fat, and flounced, her hair covered with bugles, and her hands
with mittens, to ask "if he would not come down just for half an hour to cheer
him up a bit." A perfect recollection of her figure, clothed in a silk which
had seen the grease of many a Christmas goose, to make no mention of a
cotton-velvet jacket which covered irremediable rents in her bodice, came to
the accountant's mind. He remembered the lace that trimmed the sleeves, the
edging of her flounces, the marvellous frogs that sported up the front of her
jacket. He could recall her smiling, self-satisfied face, and the tone, half
compassionate, half deprecating, in which she preferred her request. 
He followed her to the door disappointed at hearing he was not lonely and did
not care for society, and he heard the rustle of her dress and the pit-patting
of her feet as she trotted away down-stairs again, and opened the drawing-room
door through which a volley of laughter escaped, just as heated air rushes out
through a ventilator.
He could remember that marvellous little pudding, about the size of a breakfast
cup, which was always sent up by the maid-of-all-work, with "missus's
compliments, and hopes you won't be offended, sir, but she made it herself;"
said maid of-all-work being in a chronic state of grin, consequent on Christmas
boxes, excitement, and a new cap. He thought of dreary walks through wet
streets  frosty streets  across, the parks, over the bridges. He recollected
going to bed after a day that seemed to have been thirty-six hours long, and
waking out of a long sleep to hear the laughing still vehement below, and the
clinking of glasses on the landing. He remembered once flying from Christmas in
London, packing a carpet-bag, relieving his landlady of his presence, and
departing for Canter bury, where he put up at a second-rate hotel, in which, to
his dismay, he found the landlord's son was lying dead up-stairs, as the waiter
informed him at dinner, by way, doubtless, of improving his appetite. There
were no Christmas festivities in that house to annoy him, but he found
Christmas with mourning plumes worse than Christmas with holly, and mistletoe,
and riotous laughter, and so never tried the experiment again. 
Christmas in offices was a degree better, certainly, than Christmas in
lodgings, for he was delivered from plum-pudding, and he had the Christian
satisfaction of doing good unto others by taking care of the premises whilst
the housekeeper (Mrs Grimsby) and her husband (Mrs Grimsby) went to Kennington
to eat their goose with (Mrs Grimsby's mamma). But still Christmas, even in his
own castle, with silent rooms and a good fire  his tea-things left ready, and a
kettle on the hob  was dreary work; and the accountant found what most of us do
find some time or other in our lives, that though we may live without our kind
for three hundred and sixty-four days out of the year, there comes one day when
we want some friend to speak to, and wish us the compliments of the season.
For this reason George Geith, now that he was free, accepted Mr Bemmidge's
invitation. Of Mrs B. he knew no more than that she economized her tea, and
was, according to her husband's statement, the best wife that ever breathed.
But he pictured her as rather a homely personage  a motherly, comfortable kind
of woman, who might not perhaps be adapted to adorn any sphere, but who exactly
suited the one in which Providence had placed her. 
In this supposition, however, Mr Geith was not quite correct, for Mrs Bemmidge
was neither motherly nor homely, nor a particularly good wife; on the contrary,
she was rather one of those women whom London breeds by thousands; who emerge
from back parlours in dingy City streets, from little suburban villas, and from
third-rate boarding-schools, to make some honest man's life wretched, and to
train up more girls to greater pretension, greater snobbishness, and less
usefulness, than their mothers. 
A mean woman withal, and yet extravagant, who was always pinching and saving,
spilling and spending, who looked after ounces of sugar, and grudged extra
slices of bread, and still who dressed well, ate well, slept softly, and took care of No. 1.
And this No. 1 was always sounding her own personal praises in her husband's
ear. Who managed so well as she? who had so nice-looking a drawing-room? who
looked after her (bemmidge servants) so constantly? who skirmished with the
(bemmidge tradespeople) more incessantly? into whose house were greater
bargains carried than into hers? 
If Mr Bemmidge or anybody else could answer these questions, she, Mrs B., would
be obliged to them, but as no one ever attempted to contradict her, said debt
of gratitude to society was never contracted by the lady who had determined to know Mr Geith. 
For Mr Bemmidge had employed no words of course when he said his wife would be
made happy by the accountant sharing their Christmas dinner. It was no facon de
parler to state that Mrs Bemmidge had threatened to invade Fen Court herself.
Mrs Bemmidge had threatened and would have performed, only Mr Geith's
acceptance averted any such calamity. He was coming, "for certain," added her
husband, and therefore Mrs Bemmidge began to set her house in order; stuffed
the fatted goose; lived in her kitchen; manufactured mince-pies; mixed
plum-pudding, and made herself as generally disagreeable as a fussy, managing,
selfish, vulgar woman can. 
Little did Mr Geith think, as he drove up the Holloway Road, of all the
preparations which had been made in his honour; of the torments Mrs Bemmidge
had passed through, wondering what he liked best to eat and drink. Every
imaginable dish, every obtainable beverage was had in his honour; and Mrs
Bemmidge herself, and Mrs B.'s mother (Mrs Gilling) and sister (Miss Gilling),
were duly ready to receive the stranger.
As for Mr Bemmidge, he was waiting for his friend in the highway: and as soon
as Mr Geith's cab came to a stand, the wine merchant opened the door, wrung his
visitor's hand, wished him a merry Christmas, hurried him through the little
green gate, up the gravel-walk, and into the house, where Mrs Bemmidge met him,
and saying, "this is kind," shook his hand with her own two; one being quite
insufficient to express her feelings of pleasure and satisfaction. 
"I really thought, Mr Grant, Geith I mean, that we never were going to see
you;" and as she made this assertion Mrs Bemmidge took him out of the dark hall
into the lighter drawing-room, where he was introduced to Mrs Gilling, Miss Gilling, and Mr Foss. 
After that ceremony he was permitted to sit down and commence making himself
agreeable. Whilst he did so, he looked at the ladies, and  (I the narrator) 
should like you also, reader, to look at the feminine trio for a moment, before
proceeding with my story. 
Shall we give the pas to Miss Gilling  a creature all nature, all curls, all
enthusiasm, all frankness, who had a very white skin, and very black hair, very
fine eyes, very small feet and hands, and a very passable figure. 
Her age, you ask? (I the narrator) really do not know it. What with her
manners, her curls, her naivet, and her delight at small atoms of pleasure, she
might have passed for sweet seventeen; but then Mrs Bemmidge was
three-and-thirty; and intimate friends said there was not much more than five
or six years between them. 
Anyhow, there was Miss Gilling, let her age be what it would, for Mr Geith to
fall in love with, if he liked. 
As for Mrs Gilling, she was a widow of small property and with many wants; a
lady who said she had kept a set of servants  whatever number that may be; who
had once had things "very different," and who was now very glad to drop in
about supper time three or four nights a week and partake of such hospitality
as Mrs Bemmidge extended to her. A dignified old lady, in a prodigious cap, who
snubbed Andrew Bemmidge, and paid court to her daughter; and told everybody
that "Sarah" was the best wife and mother in the world. "I am sure," added (Mrs
Gilling), pathetically, "she makes a perfect slave of herself for her family."
Slavery seemed to agree with Mrs Bemmidge, who looked plump on her work. She
was a woman of about the middle height, with dark-brown eyes, brown hair, a
perfectly straight mouth, and a broad, fair forehead, with rather bustling
manners, and a temper  (I the narrator) had better stop there, for George Geith saw only the face. 
As for Mr Foss, he seemed to be regarded as a perfect nonentity. A friend Mrs
Bemmidge called him, and he certainly seemed to have all a friend's undesirable
privileges con ceded to him. He rang the bell, he was hustled into corners, he
was sent errands, he played with the children (bemmidge children), he was
forgotten in the conversation, and made himself "quite at home" sitting in a direct draught. 
He was a distant relation of Andrew Bemmidge, and had all the wine-merchant's
natural modesty, sweetness of temper, and forgetfulness of himself. 
Like the wine-merchant also, he could not see what was best for his domestic
happiness, for he was over head and ears in love with Gertrude Gilling, and
walked miles along the London pavements to fulfil her slightest behest.
"You found it cold, sir," said Mrs Gilling, in her usual manner, only with the chill off.
"On the contrary, very warm," answered George; "but then, to be sure, I drove.
I dare say the wind is cold to-day when walking. Have you been out?"
"Only to church," answered Mrs Gilling, virtuously, and the accountant,
remembering what his friend had said on that head, let the subject drop. 
"What a nice little place you have here, Bemmidge," he said; "I should scarcely
have supposed that near London there had been a house so much in the country."
"Nothing but fields at the back," replied Mr Bemmidge, while the ladies
mentally repeated the word "little," and marvelled at what size of house Mr
Geith had been accustomed to visit. "Nothing but fields most part of the way to
Hornsey; pretty neighbourhood; beautiful walks about Highgate; the cemetery is
well worth seeing. You must come down often in the summer time and explore the country."
Whereupon Mrs Bemmidge at once expressed a hope that now Mr Geith had found his
way out to Holloway, he would make no stranger of himself, but come often and
"take them as they were;" which could not be supposed to mean as they were
then, seeing heaven and earth had been moved to put a good face on things in his honour. 
George, in reply, stated his opinion that Mrs Bemmidge was too kind, and Mrs
Bemmidge became duly satisfied that Mr Geith was a delightful man. 
That half-hour before dinner the accountant firmly believed never would end 
not because he was hungry and wished for dinner, but because he was wearied to
death of trying to find something to say. 
The children (bemmidge children) had, indeed, promised a temporary diversion
when they came in duly brushed, washed, and combed, to make the lives of all on
whom they cast their affections a weariness unto them. One little girl (Amy
Bemmidge) in especial, who had inquired pointedly, "Aint oo Mr Rant? "seemed
inclined to take him under her protection; but Mr Foss presented such
attractions as the children tried vainly to resist: pockets filled with
presents  pockets that he let them turn inside out at their sweet will and
pleasure  pockets from which halfpence might be abstracted and sweetmeats procured.
To be sure, Mrs Bemmidge exhibited the little girl (Amy Bemmidge)
aforementioned in every possible light; called the pert, ugly imp her "pretty
queen," retailed all her stupid, forward speeches, and kept the child in a grin
at the repetition of her own wit. 
"She said she was not to call you Mr Rant any more, but Mr Teeth," observed her
mother. "Why did you call him Mr Rant after all, dearie?"
In answer to which question Miss Bemmidge drew her shoulder completely out of
her dress and rubbed herself sideways against her mother. A churn of a child
the thing was, too, thicker round its waist than any other part of its body,
and with the most astonishing pair of legs George Geith had ever beheld on a creature of its age. 
"Just six last birthday," said Mrs Bemmidge, with a triumphant smile, as though
she were stating some fact greatly to the credit of her offspring. "May I doo
now, and 'peak to (Harry Foss), ma?" whispered the young lady, who could have
spoken a great deal less like a two year-old had she chosen; and mamma giving
permission, she rushed over to Mr Foss and claimed her share of the spoil. 
"Oh! you've been and given Tommy a sugar-plum more than me," shrieked mamma's
queen, and forthwith Mr Foss had to make up the deficit. "And your'n are bigger
nor mine," said Tommy with his tongue out, all of which by-play Mr Geith affected not to hear. 
"We have one younger than any of them," remarked Mr Bemmidge, who was
accustomed to the juvenile concert. "Mamma, Mr Geith has not seen (baby bemmidge)."
"I am sure Mr Geith does not want to see any more children until after dinner,"
answered Mrs Bemmidge, which statement would have been perfectly true, had she
only added that he did not want to see any more children at all; but politeness
prevented Mr Geith acquiescing in her proposition, and so he declared that of
all things he should like best to see the baby (Baby Bemmidge). 
Straight away went the hostess to fetch her youngest born and during her
absence George racked his brains what to say to Mrs Gilling. The theatres? Miss
Gilling was so well up in them that his ignorance was exposed in a minute.
How the country looked at Christmas; how the old customs were still kept up in
many a squire's house? 
Mrs Gilling knew nothing about the country; for her part she liked the gas and
the shops; but Miss Gilling was enthusiastic concerning the snow on the
tombstones; about frost on the evergreens; about the village choristers singing
under the windows. Oh! better than anything on earth, Miss Gilling would like
to spend a Christmas in a real old haunted house, where the olden fashions were observed.
"Had Mr Geith ever spent a Christmas in the country?" and every hair on Miss
Gilling's head seemed to quiver as she asked the question. 
"Yes," he answered, "I have spent several Christmas days in the country."
"And in a baronial hall?" gasped Miss Gilling. 
"In an old hall, at any rate," he replied laughing, "where Christmas was given
every honour it deserves; and when we were all very happy because we were
assembled together on the happiest day in the year."
"Oh! you will be contrasting that day with this," said Miss Gilling pathetically. 
"Certainly not to the disadvantage of the present," was Mr Geith's reply, at
which Miss Gilling blushed and simpered, whilst her mother (Mrs Gilling) smiled
with the chill more off than ever. 
At this juncture, in came the baby (Baby Bemmidge); and it may not be out of
place here to state, that if there were one domestic animal for which, more
than another, Mr Geith entertained a settled abhorrence, it was a baby  more
particularly the kind of baby which now made its appearance, red in the face,
blue in the arms, long in the legs, small in the eyes, and puckered about the
mouth; a baby which cried without tears, and kicked without reason, and was, so
said its mamma (Mrs Bemmidge), "the quietest little lamb that ever breathed."
Long and weary had been George Geith's experience of babies. Never any part of
his clerical duty had been so irksome to him as the christenings. The funeral
service was nothing to the baptismal. He would rather have had to do with
half-a-dozen corpses than one baby. He did not know how to hold them, how to
quiet them, what in the name of wonder to do with them. His rector used to be
able to nurse a child as cleverly as a good cook can turn a pancake; but he
never could learn the trick; and so surely as he had a christening, so
certainly there was weeping and wailing beside the font, dissatisfaction
amongst the mothers, and muttered remarks that it was plain to be seen he was a bachelor. 
And now here was another autocrat for him to serve and honour; another mass of
jelly, provided with lungs, for him to essay to touch. 
"A fine fellow, isn't he?" said the father, who really believed the child to be perfection. 
"A darling, itzy witzy pet," capped (Mrs Bemmidge), handing the bundle of white
cambric to Mr Geith. 
No, it did not cry; it just remained quiet long enough to get well into his
arms, when it bent itself double, backwards, in order to get a good view of his
face. Then its cheeks wrinkled, and with limbs drawn up it screamed as though
its last hour was come. 
"Let mamma take it then, a darling. Shall mamma take it? Didn't it like
strangers? there, there!" And Mrs Bemmidge tried to pacify the wretch, and bore
it off to its own especial apartment, whence George heard shrieks proceeding
during the whole of dinner, which, much to his relief, was at last an announced.
CHAPTER 6. PLEASURE.

It was a nice little party, only six. Mr Bemmidge took charge of his
mother-in-law (mrs gilling), Mr Foss of Miss Gilling, and Mr Geith of Mrs
Bemmidge. A nice little party  at least it would have been a convenient number
had the children (bemmidge children) not swarmed after the adults into the
dining-room, where they mounted high chairs, and surveyed the table from a vantage ground. 
Mrs Gilling was good enough to say grace; perhaps because her son-in-law would
not. George Geith had never dined at any man's table since the days when that
ceremony was usually performed by him; and somehow Mrs Gilling's grace struck
him as the funniest thing about her. 
For the sake of his friend, for the genuine liking he bore for that
simple-hearted, honest man, who believed in his wife and his house, and who had
not an atom of humbug in his composition, the accountant strove to enjoy
himself, and to eat and drink enough to satisfy his host. 
But had he succeeded in this endeavour, he would certainly never have eaten and
drank any more, for Mr Bemmidge not merely wanted him to taste everything that
was on the table, but also to take two or three helpings of each dish, like Mrs
Gilling, whose appetite, it was satisfactory to see, had not been impaired by
trouble. Of course it was not civil of George to notice such matters, but being
a man who noticed everything, he could not avoid seeing that Mrs Gilling did
justice to the good fare set before her. 
"She would trouble Andrew for sucking pig, because it was years since she had
tasted one; and, as it was Christmas, she positively must have a slice of
turkey. Goose was a thing dear Sarah knew she could relish if she was dying,
and roast beef   well, if Mr Geith would be so kind, it was an English dish,
and it was as well to follow old customs."
So the lady rambled about whilst the children (bemmidge children) ate stuffing,
and spilt gravy, and messed their pinafores, and their father (mr bemmidge)
employed his time in alternately scolding and giving them tit-bits. 
"I am so sorry, Mr Geith, that we have nothing you like," said Mrs Bemmidge
plaintively, after she had vainly pressed Mr Geith to take a little more, "if
it was only a morsel of beef."
"Nothing I like!" repeated George. "I assure you, Mrs Bemmidge, I have not
eaten such a dinner for seven years."
"Then I wonder you are alive," remarked the lady, as she helped her mother to
turkey again. "Tommy, do sit up; (young Andrew), keep your fingers out of the
gravy; papa, do not let Amy have any more; (young Harry), if you don't behave
yourself you shall not taste the pudding," and so forth; the courtesies of life
being blended with a strict attention to its duties.
"What am I to do with it?" thought George Geith, as he had about a pound of
plum-pudding set before him, with an intimation from Mrs Bemmidge that it was a
triumph of her own culinary skill. And the accountant longed for the days of
his youth, when he had a knack of secreting pieces of fat and other unsavoury
viands, unknown by mortal man. "If I could but leave it? "he sighed; but no,
there it was to be finished, and by him. 
Mrs Bemmidge would hear of no smaller portion; and indeed, in comparison to
his, that allotted to Mrs Gilling was a very Benjamin's. 
"I am quite sure, Sarah, those children will make themselves ill," said their
grandmother, as Miss Bemmidge slily put forth her hand to secure another mince-pie. 
"You naughty girl, how dare you?" said (Mrs Bemmidge) to her queen. "Papa, push
her chair from the table. I suppose it is because Mr Geith is here, she thinks
she may do as she likes. Mr Geith, have you found the ring? There is a ring in
the pudding. I hope you will get it; I shall be so pleased."
"Perhaps, Mrs Bemmidge, you have taken care I shall get it," answered George,
with a ghastly attempt at a smile, as he still worked his way through the mass before him. 
"Oh no! it was fairly mixed, I assure you," broke in Miss Gilling; "my sister
dropped in the ring, and we all stirred the pudding after that. Even Andrew
ventured into the kitchen to do his part," which was the less to be wondered
at, perhaps I may add, as Andrew had very often to venture into the kitchen in
search of his boots. 
"And supposing I do find the ring," said George, "what will be the consequence? "
"Why, you will be married before the year is out," answered Mrs Bemmidge, with a simper. 
"Then I shall certainly not continue the search," exclaimed the accountant, laying down his spoon.
"Oh! but that is not fair," cried Mrs Bemmidge. "You must finish your pudding.
And, besides, it is my guard ring, and I cannot have it lost."
"I never willingly put myself in the way of misfortune," said Mr Geith, solemnly.
"Only hear him," exclaimed Mrs Gilling, with her mouth full of plums. 
"I hope, ring or no ring, you will be married by this time next year," said Mr
Bemmidge, "for a man never knows what true comfort and happiness is till he has
a wife to take care of him."
"You speak from a fortunate experience," answered Mr Geith. "If all marriages
were as happy as yours "and the hypocrite turned to Mrs Bemmidge and the young
olive branches round the table, who were by this time busy with his plate,
looking out "mamma's ring," and quarrelling for the candied lemon.
Suddenly there came a little scream from Miss Gilling  she had nearly swallowed the ring. 
"Gerty's got it! Gerty's got it!" cried parents and children in chorus. 
"We may hope, then," said George, "to meet together again before next Christmas
on a different occasion. That is," he added, "if I may be allowed the honour of being present." 
But at this point Miss Gilling's confusion and blushes be came so painful that
Mrs Bemmidge desired Amy to ring the bell. "If you won't have a mince-pie, Mr
Geith," she said, quite piteously. 
"You really must excuse me," he replied. And then the servant (bemmidge
servant) came, and went through a ceremony that Mrs Bemmidge called "clearing
away;" after which Mrs Gilling again officiated, and dessert was placed on the table. 
"May I tay with papa and Mr Teeth, mamma?" asked Amy, when the ladies rose to depart. 
"Yes, if you are good," said mamma; and Miss Bemmidge, and consequently the boys, remained.
Certainly, if the condition mentioned in her mother's speech had been enforced,
the young lady would have been summarily expelled from the apartment. So long
as the quartet could get Mr Foss to supply them with fruit they remained
preternaturally quiet; but when even Mr Foss thought they had made sufficient
inroads on the oranges and walnuts, Miss Bemmidge commenced to be dictorial
towards her brothers, and so aggravated Tommy that he pushed her off her chair,
for which offence he was ejected from the delights of after-dinner chat, and
sent in disgrace to his mother (mrs bemmidge).
"You smoke, I know, Geith," said Mr Bemmidge; and there upon Amy rushed away
for the cigar-case, procured matches, and made herself busy, getting a saucer to hold the ashes. 
"That is my useful little girl," remarked Mr Bemmidge. "I wonder if she could
eat an orange." Whereupon Amy put her finger in her mouth, and looked as if she
never had dexterously appropriated an orange in her life. 
After that she climbed on the knees of all the gentlemen in succession, and
reversing the position of Mr Foss's cigar when it lay on the table, had the
inexpressible satisfaction of seeing him put the hot end in his mouth. 
Shrieks of laughter from (young Andrew) and Henry, however, exposed the
culprit, and Miss Amy, together with her brothers, was shown the door by her
father, who remarked apologetically to his cousin, that "children would be children."
Whether Mr Foss found the aphorism cool his mouth, (I the narrator) cannot say;
but it is certain he declined further smoking for that night. 
It was all very well talking to Mr Bemmidge and Mr Foss when the children
(bemmidge children) were away. Of course the conversation turned on business
topics, but business was a topic George Geith liked. 
The mysteries of the wine trade were unveiled for the visitor's edification.
The adulteration, tricks, the doctoring, were all duly discussed over  shall (I
the narrator) write it reader?brandy-and water. Mr Bemmidge talked about
Messrs. Reuben and Issachar, "who had been exchequered for eighty thousand, and
paid the fine," said Mr Bemmidge, taking the cigar out of his mouth, "with a
cheque. They were exchequered," he went on, "for filling barrels with water,
and shipping them as brandy, in order to get the draw-back. They managed, by
fitting a tin tube to the bung-hole, to enable the Custom-house officer to
taste the very finest brandy. How much they made nobody ever knew," added Mr
Bemmidge, "nor how much they might have made, but for a row with one of their
men, who informed against them." 
Then there were (Cripple Hold and Sons), who ran their spirit off through the
streets; beside gas-pipes and water-pipes, through houses, stables, and
warehouses, and only paid duty on about a third they made. 
Further there was Mr Briggins, who sold thousands of pipes of wine, and yet,
still, who scarcely ever took a single pipe out of bond. "He made it all 
heaven only knows how," said Mr Bemmidge, regretfully; "and the secret died
with him. (I the narrator) could not have told his wine from the best
Portuguese; and, indeed, nobody could, if the wine would have kept. But it
would not. It mildewed in a month. The firm sold it at forty shillings a dozen,
and twenty to the trade. And didn't the trade push it  only trust them!"
So the talk went on till it was time to join the ladies, who were seated in the
drawing-room, all domestic arrangements over, waiting for the evening guests,
who arrived in due season, attired in dresses that were certainly very gay,
determined to enjoy themselves and make Christmas-day a merry one indeed. 
Can you picture the evening, my reader? The tea, handed round by awkward yet
gallant cavaliers, who upset the cups, trampled on the ladies' dresses, and
made funny little speeches that kept the company in a roar. The card-tables,
where whist was played for sixpenny stakes, and old ladies appropriated George
Geith's winnings with an activity which it was cheering to remark in persons of their age  
The dancing, for which Mrs Bemmidge played Sir Roger de Coverley, Hertz
quadrilles, and Scotch reels  
The games, mistakes in which entailed forfeits, and forfeits involved a young
gentleman seeking about for the prettiest girl in the room to kiss; a young
lady standing in the corner and remarking  
Here I stand as stiff as a stake  
Who'll come and release me for charity's sake? 
Upon hearing which pathetic appeal a rush was usually made towards the spot she
occupied. This person was to eat three inches off the poker; that to compose a
verse of poetry, and another to dance a minuet with the tongs. There was "Blind
man's buff," in which game Miss Gilling caught Mr Geith, and exclaiming, "I
have got you at last, Mr Jones," blushed becomingly when she discovered her
mistake. " If it was a mistake," whispered Mrs Jones, nudging her neighbour Mrs Thomas. 
And the singing after supper! The comic songs, at which George laughed as he
had not laughed before since he was a boy, not because of any especial
comicality in the songs, but because of the intense funniness of the singers.
The sentimental ditties, emanating chiefly from the ladies, that were all
pitched somewhere about F sharp, and went up into screams from thence. To say
nothing of Mrs Bemmidge, who, being too shy to favour the company, was yet
overpowered by numbers, and induced at length to break forth into melody. 
It was impossible she could sing, however, if people looked at her; so, to
obviate this difficulty, she turned her chair round, and sat with her back to
the table, in which position she de lighted her guests with the account of a lady  
"Who left her home 
To fly with a Chris-ti-an knight."
When that was finished, her sister (Miss Gilling) followed with "Love not,"
which performance Mr Foss immediately capped with "Love on," a song which was
rapturously encored by all the young men and married ladies of the party. 
After supper, more forfeits, more dancing, and louder and faster revelry, that
reminded George Geith of the sounds that used to be borne to his ear when he
kept solitary state in furnished apartments. 
"Things went off capitally," Mrs Bemmidge said to her mother when the door
closed behind the last batch of departing guests, "and I am sure Mr Geith enjoyed himself."
"If he did not, he ought to," remarked Mrs Gilling, in a tone of the liveliest
conviction; albeit her voice was a little thick. 
Meantime George Geith was walking with a splitting headache through the deserted City streets. 
"If that be pleasure," he ungratefully soliloquized as he entered Fen Court,
where the graveyard looked ghastly in the grey morning light  "If that be pleasure, give me work."
CHAPTER 7. A LITTLE COOL. 

If Miss Gilling had known what memories she was awakening when she talked so
prettily about snow on the tombstones and villagers singing Christmas hymns, it
is more than probable she would have avoided the subject of Christmas
altogether, and contented herself with some remarks on the virtues of her
sister's children (bemmidge children) and the peculiar severity of those
rheumatic attacks to which her mamma (mrs gilling) was subject in damp weather. 
But all unconsciously she had raised a legion of old associations; associations
so linked and interwoven with George Geith's best and happiest past, that,
spite of all his efforts, he could not rest content till  now that he was free
to go where and when he listed  he had revisited Morelands and seen the friends who dwelt there. 
The more he thought about Morelands, the greater grew his longing to see the
old place once again. He contrasted Morelands with Holloway  Cissy Hayles with
Gertrude Gilling  till he felt he must see the Hayleses and the Chiltern Hills once more. 
	A sickening desire to get away from streets and houses, from business
acquaintances and the treadmill of his daily life, came suddenly over the man;
and though he could ill spare a day at that season of the year, he still
determined to take a run into the country, and see if it had changed as he had
changed, or whether it would still bear the same face for him that it had done in days departed.
He could go by rail to Dunstable, and walk from thence over the downs to
Morelands. (Mr Hayles) and Mrs Hayles, he used to say, were like his parents;
the girls as thoughtful and kind as sisters; whilst, as for Cissy, of course
that pretty creature, with her winning ways and many accomplishments, could be
Cissy Hayles no longer, but must have been transformed into the wife of some
rich man, who made her happy  George Geith hoped  
And at this point he sighed. Cissy had certainly been very fond of him, poor
girl; and if he had chanced to be differently situated, who knew? He might
never have left Morelands, but remained there, and married Cissy himself. As it
was, so it was, and no doubt all for the best. He was an accountant, and Cissy,
most probably, a happy wife. At any rate, he trusted he should hear she was,
when he paid his visit to the ivy-covered rectory, which he had once been as
free to enter as though it had been his own home. 
Having thought over all which topics, George Geith told his clerk (clerk 1),
one morning, early in the new year, that he should not return before night, and
started off on his expedition, looking twice as old as the curate who had fled
from that easy country life more than seven years before. 
It was nearly eight years, in point of fact, though, as he travelled the
well-known paths, he found it hard to realize that so long a period had elapsed. 
Time in London flies. Day hurries after day; spring, summer, autumn, winter,
come and go  come and go with a rapidity frightful to think of. The hours may
appear long, because of the monotony of the work that fills them; but the week
always seems, in looking back upon it, like half a one; and Sunday, in the
city, falls about where Wednesday or Thursday might, far away in the country.
It is express pace there, year after year; we travel the miles of our
threescore-and-ten pilgrimage, but they seem short because of the speed at
which we go; and if we want to feel that our days are not flitting away so fast
that we cannot count their flight, we must go into the country, where time
travels by slow stages, and the ordinary span of human life lengthens its
apparent duration to about a hundred and fifty years. 
Eighteen months in Morelands  eight years in London! Looking back, it seemed to
George that he had resided for eighteen years in Morelands, and eight months in London. 
There was nothing, either, in the aspect of the country by which he was
surrounded to assist him in realizing the length of time that had elapsed since
he walked across those fields before. To his left, the Downs stretched away
green and monotonous as ever; to his right, the arable and pasture land was
divided into about the same proportion as formerly.
Here and there a church-tower, a few trees, a little cluster of houses,
reminded him of the situation of this or that village; but there were no new
houses, no modern mansions, no strange factories, nothing but what he had been
familiar with years previously. 
Above all, there was no town; and, looking about him and remarking this, George
Geith thanked God there was country enough left to last him his lifetime. 
It was still early in the day, and, as he did not wish to reach the rectory
before two o'clock, he diverged a little from the path, and striking into a
by-road  one of those unfenced, unhedged roads, which are peculiar to that part
of Bedfordshire  he walked on and on, till he gained the top of the hill.
Once there, he looked about him for a seat, and taking possession of a large
stone lying by the wayside, he repeated his previous thanksgiving. 
Miles without houses; far as he could see without a town! He was very happy to
be alone with nature for a while,  to be out of the roar and bustle of London,
even for a few hours. 
He took off his hat and let the north wind blow about his head. He sat there
with hands clasped before him, perfectly still and very happy. For years he had
never felt so happy before; the great silence around seemed to lay a soothing
touch on his heart, the great expanse of country filled and satisfied his soul. 
All at once years and years seemed to be struck off his life, and he was young
again. At the moment he understood the physical enjoyment some people feel in
the mere sensation of living, without having any specific object to live for,
which had often before puzzled him. 
Seated on the top of the hill, with the wind blowing crisp and cool on his
temples, George Geith felt that "to be," utterly independent of "to have," was
an unspeakable boon and blessing. 
It was well to have toiled and worked, and been a prisoner, if but to feel this
satisfaction and happiness.
It was worth being mewed up in a town in order to understand the majesty and
beauty of God's handiwork. 
Wheresoever they would, he let his eyes roam  now into the valley he had just
left, and again over the country lying on the other side of the hill where he sat. 
He followed the distant trains as the engines went puffing along their
respective lines; he skirted the Chiltern Hills till he descried the distant
woods of Snareham Castle. 
Far below him were churches with little hamlets gathered around them, and each
church he saw had a tower and a flat roof like that at Great Snareham, which,
though he had relinquished the living, still belonged to his family. 
By degrees he looked less at the other points of the land scape, and more at
the Snareham woods. They lay miles and miles from him on the hill-side, but
still he could see them standing dark and bare against the wintry sky.
Was Lady Geith at the Castle, he marvelled? was Mark married? was his uncle
Arthur living? What change had the years brought to them? "Mark must be
eight-and-twenty now," he reflected. "How the time has flown!" 
It had flown even whilst he remained sitting there, and he was about to turn
his face down the hill again, when he saw, mounting its crest, and then coming
tearing along the table land at top, a great black horse, which flung out its
feet at the rate of twelve miles an hour, and dragged a well-appointed
dog-cart, containing a gentleman (Mark Geith) and his groom (Mark geith's
servant), as easily as though the whole turn-out did not weigh half a hundred. 
Idly, as holiday-makers always look upon fresh incidents of any kind, George
Geith watched the carriage come spinning on. 
"A good whip and a good horse," he thought, and next instant he cried out to
the former, "The throat-piece is loose."
"What do you say? "asked the driver (Mark Geith), pulling up so suddenly that
he almost brought the horse on his haunches. 
"Your throat-piece is loose," repeated George, and he got up to buckle it, an
attention which the horse resented by rising on his hind legs. 
"Don't touch him; stand clear, will you; d-it, are you tired of your life?"
thundered the owner (Mark Geith), but George held his ground and brought the animal down again. 
"Be quiet, you brute," he said, keeping a grip on the bridle with one hand,
while he vainly tried to fasten the band with the other; but in the meantime
the (Mark Geith's servant) came to the rescue, and looking at his livery George
saw he had the Geith crest on his buttons. From the man he turned to the
master, and behold! the master was his cousin Mark. 
"You are a cool hand," remarked that gentleman, with a certain admiration, "you
must be devilishly well accustomed to horses."
"It is many a year since I had anything to do with them," was the reply, and
the two men stared at each other for a moment. 
Then, "Mark, don't you know me?" 
"By Jove! it's George," burst from them simultaneously, and the pair grasped hands. 
"What were you doing here?" asked the baronet. 
"Resting myself," answered the accountant. 
"Where are you bound for?"
"Morelands; I have a couple of hours to spare, and want to see the Hayleses."
"Now, that is odd," cried Sir Mark; "I have just left the rectory. I will drive
you back  jump in!" And without more ado the young man turned his horse's
(mark's horse) head round in the direction of Morelands. 
"Now, don't do that," pleaded George, "I should like the walk, and I shall not
give you the trouble."
"Hang the trouble!" said Sir Mark; "jump in;" and thus exhorted his cousin
obeyed, the (Mark Geith's  servant) sprang on behind, and away they went down
the hill and across the valley at a pace which brought them to the rectory
gates in less than twenty minutes. 
"This will be a surprise," exclaimed Sir Mark, as they flew round the drive. 
"Entre nous, do you think Paterfamilias (Mr Hayles) will be glad to see you? "
"I do not know why he should not," answered the accountant; "do you?"
"No," was the reply, "but I opine that absence has not made his heart grow
fonder, so do not be disappointed. Forewarned, you know," finished Sir Mark, as
he preceded his cousin through the open door and walked across the hall with a
freedom, not to say familiarity, which astonished the ci-devant curate not a little. 
"I found an old friend of yours on the hills, and brought him to see you, Mrs
Hayles," said the baronet, as he entered the room where Mrs Hayles and her
daughters were engaged in such light occupation as befitted the room and the
hour. "You do not seem to remember him; allow me to introduce my cousin, the Rev. George Geith."
As a hen ruffles up her plumage, and backs into the nearest comer, when an
enemy approaches her brood, so Mrs Hayles, at sight of the unclerical figure
thus presented, shook out her maternal feathers, and prepared to do battle in
behalf of the innocent children surrounding her. 
She was awkwardly placed  between the Scylla of Sir Mark, whom she did not wish
to offend, on the one hand, and the Charybdis of George, whom she did not wish
to encourage, on the other. 
But Mrs Hayles was equal to the occasion; she froze her visitor by civility.
She iced the waters of her conversation, and then gave him nice-looking yet
chilly fragments for his refreshment.
 "So glad to see him; so good of him to call; where had he been hiding himself?
Sophy, run and tell papa (mr hayles) Mr Geith has called to see him."
Meantime the young ladies were iced likewise, only without their mamma's
civility. All except Cissy, who was Miss Hayles still, and who came forward
with the old sweet smile, and the old charm of manner, to tell Mr Geith how
delighted she was his cousin had brought him to see them. "But surely," she
added, "you would have come of yourself, if within twenty miles of us?" and the
soft blue eyes were raised to his for a moment as the beauty (Cissy Hayles) spoke. 
"Come! of course he would," said Mrs Hayles, with a slight frown directed
towards her daughter, which did not escape the visitor's notice. "And where
have you been all this time, Mr Geith; and are we to congratulate you on an excellent living?"
"If you will be so kind," answered the accountant, "I have fallen into an
excellent living  out of the Church."
"Do you mean--," inquired the lady. 
"That I have relinquished the Church? Yes. I am in business in London."
"You are not serious?" Mrs Hayles was very much in earnest as she asked the question. 
"I am indeed," was the reply; "I have been in business ever since I left Morelands."
"How sorry Mr Hayles will be," opined his wife. "Such a pity, such talents,
such advantages, such an opening!" and Mrs Hayles complacently folded her white hands and sighed. 
"But if Mr Geith be doing well, mamma," interposed Cissy. 
"My love, I am surprised at you," said mamma, "for a man who has once entered
the Church to relinquish her service so lightly--"
"I assure you," interrupted George, "I was driven from the Church by a stern
necessity. I did not quit her service voluntarily, but having left it I should
neither be able nor wishful to re-enter my old sphere of labour."
"The Snareham patriarch is still alive," here broke in Sir Mark, "and the
living is yours, George, remember, whenever he goes. It belongs to nobody else,
so long as you like to take it."
"But Mr Geith could not take it now," said Mrs Hayles, very softly. "Surely if
it be impossible for a layman to serve both God and Mammon, it would be
something more than impossible for a clergyman to do so  and soiled as Mr
Geith's cloth is with contact with the world --"
"Contact with nonsense!" retorted Sir Mark  "that is, Mrs Hayles, I did not
mean it; I really am very sorry; I beg your pardon, I thought I was talking to
George. What I meant to say was this, George is not soiled. He won't serve God
and Mammon; he will only take Snareham and stick to it till some thing better
offers. He will make as good a parson now as ever and preach as good a sermon,
and I can only repeat that Great Snareham is very heartily at his service; and
I am very glad to have an opportunity of telling him so."
"Thank you, Mark," answered his cousin, "but it may not be. I have eaten of the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil, and can never more return to a state of
innocence, believing a curate's life to be a desirable one, and four hundred a
year a meed of wealth wherewith to be content. I am very much obliged for your
great kindness, but I shall not ask you for Great Snareham, for I cannot re-enter the Church."
"How grieved Mr Hayles will be," reiterated Mrs Hayles. 
"I hope he will not grieve on my account," said George, smiling in spite of
himself; "for I am doing very well indeed, and no one ought to know better than
Mr Hayles, that every man who leaves the Church throws an extra chance in the
way of those who remain."
At which remark, Sir Mark, seizing a convenient opportunity, winked at his cousin. 
It was not, perhaps, gentlemanly, but it conveyed to George the correct
impression that Sir Mark knew the lady wanted to have the living of Great
Snareham for her husband, and that, ironically, he hoped she might get it. 
"I shall keep the living for you, George," said the baronet determinedly. "And
if you do not like it when it falls in, I shall give it to someone to nurse
till you change your mind."
"You have not lunched, Mr Geith, I am sure," exclaimed Mrs Hayles, who had
heard enough of Great Snareham, and was desirous of shifting her ground. "Maud,
ring the bell. Cissy, see what Sophy is doing, and whether she can find your papa."
"Let me go," said that easy friend of the family, Sir Mark Geith; and though
Mrs Hayles declared she could not think of troubling him, he was so kind as to
accompany Cissy on her rambles, whether with the intention of finding papa (mr
hayles), or having a moment's tete-a-tete, George did not know, and did not
much care; for everything in the old rectory was changed for him, and the
people who lived there were his friends, his dear familiar friends, no more. 
Meantime Maud stood with her hand on the bell-rope, a fair white hand, which
the accountant noticed, as he assured her mamma (mrs hayles) that he had
lunched  that he had only a few minutes longer to stay. 
"We dine at five, Mr Geith, and we really cannot let you run away in this
manner, after so long an absence."
"You are very kind, but I must get back to town."
"Well, a glass of wine at any rate."
Here Maud made a feint of grasping the rope, and George Geith watched her
pantomime of bell-ringing with some interest.
How well he remembered Maud as a child, with her broad brimmed straw hat, with
her streaming curls, and her quiet, decorous manners. A child who was almost
too shy to say "thank you" freely to a stranger, and who had yet developed into
this calm, self-possessed young lady, whom George looked at till he wondered. 
"I never take wine in the middle of the day," he said, even whilst he was
marvelling at the changes a few years had wrought. 
"Mr Hayles will scold me, I know," said the lady in a tone of deep distress,
for she was beginning to think she had iced her manner too much, and that
George saw through her a little too well. "Maud, ring the bell; we will have
lunch brought up at any rate." And Maud did ring, for she saw her mother was at last in earnest. 
"I beg," entreated the visitor, "that you will not order any lunch for me. I
really must get back to the station at once. I had but a short time to spare,
but being in the neighbourhood I thought I could not pass your door."
"It was so kind  so like you. Oh! here is Mr Hayles." And the rector's lady
breathed a sigh of relief as her husband, accompanied by Sophy, and Cissy, and
Sir Mark, entered the apartment. 
Mr Hayles was a grey-haired man, who seemed oppressed by the size of his
family, the ever-increasing gentility of his wife, and the smallness of his
income; but he was more honest than Mrs Hayles, inasmuch as that while he shook
hands with his old curate heartily, and hoped he was well and doing well, he
still did not express any pleasure at his visit, nor request him to prolong it. 
As, however, "using hospitality without grudging," to all men, had always been
one of the rector (mr hayles)'s sins most grievous in his wife's eyes, he did
urge Mr Geith to have something to eat before he departed; and in this he was
seconded by Cissy, who, spite of the thunder-storm gathering on the maternal
brow, prayed him to stop for another half-hour at any rate. "It was so long
since they had seen him  such years and years!"
She looked very pretty as she begged him to stay. She was the same winning,
stealing, twining Cissy George Geith remembered walking with through the
rectory gardens in the old days departed, when such close intimacy was
dangerous and trying to both.
But he was not to be taken in with blue eyes and soft words and sunshiny smiles
now. He had seen her smile on Mark, in just the same manner, and he knew her at
last for what she was  a natural woman it might be, but still a woman naturally a flirt. 
"It is all grist that comes to her mill," thought George, "and I won't be
ground up in it;" which was a very prudent resolve, more especially as  God
help her Cissy Hayles had loved, and did love, George Geith more than she was
ever likely to love any man again. 
More, most certainly, than she ever could care for Sir Mark, who had few
brains, few talents, and indulged in profane swearing to an extent which
scandalized the rector (mr hayles). 
She had tried hard to win him; she was trying harder to keep him; for a baronet
and the great Geith estates, and a good marriage settlement, were things to be
desired by a poor parson's daughter. 
"It will be rest for your father (mr hayles), the making of your sisters (maud)
(sophy), and position for yourself." This was how Mrs Hayles lashed on the
willing horse whenever it faltered for a moment. 
The match would, probably, accomplish all Mrs Hayles said, and Cissy did her
best to bring it about; but for all that she could not help liking the one
cousin better than the other, and when George thought she was acting she was as
much in earnest as ever she was in her life. 
Having the baronet in tow, she would not have married the accountant, even had
he been a clergyman again, and the rector of Great Snareham to boot; but in any
capacity she would have flirted with him, and for this reason it was fortunate
that Mr Geith fortified himself against her artillery. 
It may have been also for this reason that Mr Hayles asked his visitor to spare
him a few moments before he left. 
Once in his study, the rector (mr hayles) shut the door and said, "More than
seven years ago, Mr Geith, when you left Morelands and the Church together, you
told me a painful reason was driving you from both. Within six months after, I
knew what that reason was."
It took a great deal to move George Geith's composure, but his face changed as Mr Hayles spoke.
"I do not pretend to judge you," the clergyman went on, speaking evidently with
an effort. "I do not say how far you were sinned against, how far you erred
yourself. I only know I am sorry for you now, as I was sorry for you then. But 
you came to this house under false colours; you were received by us as we never
could have received you had we known your true position. Was it right for you
to deceive me, Mr Geith? I only ask you, was it right?"
"It was not," George answered, "but I meant no harm. If I had thought my
silence could do harm to you or yours, I should have gone away long before I did."
"You mixed familiarly with our girls," continued the rector (mr hayles) , "you
who could never have married one of them. I do not want to say more; will you
finish my sentence for yourself?"
"Yes," George Geith answered, "I will. You want to know why, as I ought never
to have entered your house in the past, I have come to it in the present; and I
repeat I meant no harm to any one. I came, remembering all your former kindness
to me, and wishful to prove I was not ungrateful for it. But I will come no
more. That is what you want me to promise, Mr Hayles; and I give you my word
this is the last time I will ever cross your threshold, unless you tell me I
can benefit you or yours in some way by doing so. Now let me ask you one
question. Does Mrs Hayles, or my cousin Mark, know why I left here?"
"I forgive you the doubt," answered the rector (mr hayles), "for I know how it
has arisen. I never told your trouble to any one, and I never shall. I did say
to my wife, I regretted we had suffered such close intimacy with the girls
(cissy)(maud)(sophy), as I feared you were by no means a desirable acquaintance
for them. You could not blame me for that precaution, because I did not know
when, or where, or how they and you might meet again."
There was a moment's silence, and then George Geith held out his hand in farewell. 
Never a man had the rector (mr hayles) liked so well since they parted; and as
he looked in the worn face, at the brown hair sprinkled with grey, at the eyes
sunken with want of rest and incessant mental labour, his heart smote him for
the words he had spoken, and his voice shook a little while he begged his
visitor not to think he had been over harsh. 
"No, Mr Hayles, I can never think anything but good of you," answered George,
muttering a secret malediction at the same time against the rector's wife. 
"And are you doing well? Can I assist you in any way? If I can, let me know.
There is nothing I would not do for you, except ask you here; and that I could not, you know."
There was something very touching in the way the old clergyman said this.
Remembering all things, his visitor marvelled he was so lenient, and for a
minute felt tempted to tell him he was working for freedom no longer. 
But he put aside the impulse, and merely promising to apply to Mr Hayles should
he ever stand in need of his assistance, wrung the hand extended to him, and left the room. 
Whilst he was saying good-bye to Mrs Hayles and her daughters
(maud)(sophy)(cissy), the rector (mr hayles) stood on the door-step, waiting to
see the last of the man he once hoped to have called his son. 
Sir Mark and Mr Geith came out together. 
"If you will not go to Snareham, let me at least drop you at the station," the
former was entreating, and as nothing could be urged against this proposal,
George took his place in the dog cart, while the baronet lifted the reins. 
Then once again Mr Hayles held out his hand  coming quite close to the wheel,
so that his old curate might reach it. "Good-bye  God bless you," he said, but
before any answer could be returned, the black fiend was off; and as they swept
round the drive, the high laurels and thick shrubs shut out the sight of
Morelands Rectory from George Geith's eyes for ever! 
CHAPTER 8. ALL ON ONE SIDE. 

"Take the reins for a minute, will you? " said Sir Mark to his cousin, when
they were once more on the open road. "I want a cigar. I shan't offer you one,
old fellow," he went on, as he opened his case, "because I know you have tasted
nothing since you left London. All your fibs to mother Hayles did not impose on
me. Queer old girl, isn't she? "
"I think she is greatly changed, and not improved," answered George. 
"Changed! not a bit of it," said the baronet, scornfully. "People don't change,
they only develop; and the old lady is so cock-a-hoop about marrying one of her
girls to a baronet, that she does not know what to do with herself. Should you
like to drive? If you would, go ahead."
"Thank you, I had much rather you managed your brute (mark's horse) for
yourself. He has nearly pulled my arms off as it is."
"A trifle hard in the mouth, perhaps," said Sir Mark, as he resumed the reins;
"but his only fault."
"I should not have thought it," answered the accountant drily; "for I have seen
him rear, shy, and plunge, and I observe he requires a tidy kicking strap in addition."
"He will take us to Snareham, though, within the hour," answered the other. 
"He won't take me, thank you, Mark," was the reply; "for I must get back to London."
"So you shall, my boy; but come and dine with me first. Then, if you won't stay
longer, you shall catch the up express at the junction. There is nobody at the
castle but myself. My mother (Lady Geith) and the old cat (Mrs Lennor) are in
town, and have been there for the last three months; now don't refuse; I am
bored to death, and have lots to tell you. Besides, the drive will do you good.
Do you not feel as if the wind were blowing life into you?"
"Yes," answered George. "It is almost life to a man who has scarcely set foot
out of London all these years."
And he looked round him as he spoke. What a difference between the two lots!
between that of the possible heir (george geith), and that of the certain possessor (mark geith). 
Driving a horse (mark's horse) which knew but one pace, namely, as hard as he
could tear along the clear country road, might not seem an occupation to
desire, nor the animal's owner a person to envy; but the leisure and the wealth
which left it free to the one man to go where he liked, when he liked, as he
liked, seemed for the moment amazing to the other, who had been working on the
business treadmill for years. 
Just then pleasure seemed a very pleasant thing to the busy man. He had never
known what it was to be idle all his days. He had been reading, learning,
studying, preaching, visiting, and afterwards poring over ledgers and
balance-sheets since boyhood till then; and with that keen relish which fasting
from any indulgence induces he devoured the sensational delight of the present,
and fancied all moments must be as sweet to his cousin, as that to him. 
And indeed Sir Mark Geith was apparently fortunate enough, young enough, and
happy enough to be regarded with something like envy. 
Just twenty-eight, in the prime of health and strength, with high animal
spirits, and every capacity for taking enjoyment out of his surroundings, the
baronet was driving home to Snareham Castle, possessed of a fine estate and a
good rent-roll wherewith to keep up the dignity of an old and honoured name. 
There were no skeletons in his cupboard, unless indeed it might be the old cat
(mrs lennor) so spitefully referred to by him. He was free from all ties; the
world lay before him as it lay before George, but it was a very different world
through which he had to travel. 
Looking down at the woods which surrounded Mark's home, and contrasting the
free hill-side, and the breezy downs, and the pure, fresh air which he drank
in, as a fainting man might wine, with Fen Court, and its churchyard, and its
never-ending, always commencing round of work, George Geith felt that his
cousin was a person to be envied, and that he should like to be standing in his shoes. 
But next moment he put aside the thought. Should he, to whom God had given the
capacity for work, repine because God had not permitted him to remain idle?
Should he who could win wealth, and be proud of winning it with the strength of
his own arm, lament because a good life stood between him and this un earned
hoard? Should he be disloyal to the man who was pressing hospitality on him,
and who had been so like his brother in days gone by that, at Snareham Castle,
strangers were at a loss to decide which was the prospective baronet, and which
the country clergyman's landless son? 
Spite of his weary struggles  ay, even because of them  he would be loyal to
his cousin, true to himself; and with this better feeling there mingled another
reason for his contentment. Over and above that strange sense of personal
possession which a man feels in himself, and which makes him know he would
rather lie down in the grave in his own flesh and blood than return to life and
take another's form and soul instead, George Geith was conscious of a mental
superiority over his cousin which he would not have relinquished for ten times
his cousin's wealth. Brains, Mark had none; he had the usual amount of
conversational ability with which most young men are gifted  rather a greater
amount indeed, because his speech was perfectly unaffected and natural; but he
had no talents, no genius of any kind, and George Geith knew this. 
If both men had started fairly together in the race, without any favour shown
to either, Mark would never have reached the winning-post at all, while George
was almost sure to do so. 
Looking at his cousin, therefore, he felt somewhat as a prize fighter might, if
contemplating an effeminate stripling in armour: 
"Were we stripped to the skin," thinks the giant, "I would show you in two
minutes which is the better man."
Wealth and rank were Mark Geith's armour; they are the breastplate and helmet
which the world so often mistakes for strength. 
Have you, reader, ever thought what it must be for a man to achieve social
success in his shirt-sleeves? with what brawny arms and muscles of iron he must
have fought out his long fight. If business men are sometimes over-proud of
their achievements, it seems to me (the narrator) the aristocracy might be more
lenient towards them for this reason, viz., that mind, and body, and spirit
have been often weary with the conflict; that men, and circumstances, and
prejudices were all against them, as they toiled onward to success. 
Yet they have their balance oftentimes, too; the sure support afforded by an
inner consciousness of power. 
The poodle yelping from the carriage-window is a genteeler animal than the
unwashed, unkempt, half-starved mastiff stalking along the pavement; and yet
still, if I mistake not the faces of dogs, the mastiff has a contempt for the
poodle, and is marvelling how it would look, wandering through the streets,
wading through mire, and mud, and filth. 
"Come down to our level, ye sneerers," shouts Business. "Come from chambers of
pleasure, from couches of ease, from servants, equipages, and bankers' balances
to our level, where we will fight it out till we see if you despise us still."
And then, when Pleasure refuses the challenge, Business climbs desperately up
the hill, on the summit whereof lie the fair lands where the idlers dwell, and,
repeating its challenge, is laughed to scorn. 
For in those fair lands it is wealth, and rank, and grace, and manner that
carry the day; while down below it is something far different  something not to
be acquired by art, or inherited from man, which shall win the palm; but
strength, and energy, and patience, and prudence, and brains  all gifts direct
from God, that bring a man safe through the fiercest war which civilization permits.
 And should George Geith wish to change his pure gold for the gilding he beheld
beautifying his cousin? Scarcely, (I the narrator) think; though he was but
dimly conscious of the extent of his own possessions. Scarcely, though he
sighed when the woods surrounding Snareham Castle lay spread once more before
him. No; he would not change his own identity, and he would not covet his
cousin's goods. For all which reasons he was content, being himself, to be
still a far-off heir, down amongst the rabble, fighting for his life. 
As some such thoughts were floating through George Geith's mind, Sir Mark
pointed with his whip to the old tower of Great Snareham Church as he said, "I
shall never give it to anybody but you while Mr Hetton lives; and, if you like,
I will appoint you private chaplain till he dies."
"You are very good, Mark," was the reply; "but I shall never preach again."
"I don't want you to preach, man," retorted his cousin. "Heaven knows, I have
listened to too many sermons from my mother (Lady Geith), and madam (mrs
lennor), to wish to hear any more; but I do want you to wear a black coat and
white cravat, and say grace for me at the castle. If you would only stay where
I could lay my hand on you at any time, I would give you a couple or three
hundred a-year for sitting in the chimney corner."
"A chimney corner life would never suit me," answered the accountant. "I have
worked too long and too hard, since I saw you last, ever to rest content again
with light employment and light pay. I never did a better thing for myself than
when I left the Church. I was not adapted for a clergyman, and I have now found
out what I am fitted for."
"A pushing shopkeeper," suggested Sir Mark. 
"I would rather be that than a dependent parson, kicking my heels at a great
man's door," retorted his cousin. 
"You needn't be so sharp about the matter, damn it," observed Sir Mark. "I did
not mean to annoy you; and if you think it an insult to have a living pressed
upon you, I know somebody who would jump at it. What fun it is to watch Mrs
Hayles nibbling at the piece of preferment. She watches Great Snareham as a cat
might a larder door."
"But will you not give it to her husband?" asked George. 
"I tell you the living is yours," said the baronet, "and if it were not yours I
should not give it to Mr Hayles. He is a good man; but I have my reasons, and
he shall never have Great Snareham while I have the giving of it. But now we
are at the old place again; tell me if you think it improved?"
George looked about him. Through the trees that bordered the drive he could see
belts of young planting stretching away in the distance. He perceived that the
deer park, once so rough and neglected, was now kept smooth as a bowling green;
that the steep grassy bank, under the castle windows, was con verted into
terraces; and that below the terraces lay a pleasure garden. 
Within the court-yard, which he could remember grass-grown and comfortless,
there was another garden, and the high, black walls were now covered with ivy
and creepers, that took away the prison look from the enclosure. 
There was a carriage-drive through the centre of this garden, terminating in a
sweep before the great oaken doors of the castle. As Sir Mark pulled up, these
doors opened, and George, seeing the face of the butler, who was waiting to
receive his master, exclaimed: 
"Why, that is Corby!"
"Yes," answered his cousin. "I think you will find all your old friends inside 
at least, I have parted with none of them. Bob died last winter. You remember
Bob, who taught us both to ride. That is the only man who was here in my father
(the late sir mark)'s time who is not here now, and perhaps they won't be glad
to see you! Corby, who do you think this is? Why, you don't mean to say you
forget him? He knew you."
"I declare it's Master George," cried the old man, joyfully. "We have all asked
about you so long, sir, we thought it was of no use asking anymore." And then
George went through the halls and corridors, shaking hands with one and another
of the people, who had known him from the time he was a boy. It was a change
from Fen Court certainly, where no voice ever welcomed his return, to Snareham
Castle, with the servants (snareham servants) crowding about him, and hoping he
was well and coming back to live near them. 
If he had been the owner twenty times over they could not have seemed more glad to see him. 
"If her ladyship (lady geith) was here now she would be pleased," remarked the
(Snareham housekeeper). "She has said to me times out of number she was sure
you were gone to India, and that she would never see you again."
"I have not been to India," answered George, laughing, "though I have been in
places my aunt would think stranger than that; "and having thus parried the
(Snareham housekeeper)'s question, he turned to Mark, whose face had fallen a
little when the woman spoke of his mother.
For Lady Geith had always been fonder of George Geith than of her own son, and
made no secret of her preference, and it was not singular, therefore, that any
illusion to her predilections proved painful to Sir Mark. 
Nevertheless, being of a very generous nature, he bore no grudge to George, but
welcomed his cousin as cordially to Snareham, as though there had never been
any cause for jealousy between them. 
"He could not," so he told George after dinner, "forget the old times when they
were boys together, and he wanted some one of his own blood to talk to."
"I have no person now at all," he added, as he pushed the wine towards his
cousin; "my father (the late sir mark) is dead, and I believe my mother (Lady
Geith) hates me; and my uncle Arthur is very little better than an idiot, and
his wife (Mrs Arthur) says I am not a Geith at all. And when I want to marry,
that old devil, Mrs Lennor, sets her face against Cissy, and makes my mother
(Lady Geith) ten times worse than ever. We are not on terms now at all. Her
ladyship and Mrs Lennor live in Halkin Street, and I stay here."
"I do not understand how it is you and your mother (lady geith) cannot agree," remarked George. 
"It is Mrs Lennor," was the reply; "I believe that if the old hag were out of
the country, we should get on well enough. But she is like an open blister, and
I get so mad to think what a fool I have been, that it makes matters worse."
"How have you been a fool? "asked George. 
"Oh, spending money, and being a devil of an idiot," was the reply. "I came
into an unencumbered estate  that is, unencumbered except by myself  and
instead of paying off the Jews, and making a clean breast of affairs to my
solicitor (mark's solicitor), I must needs begin improving and spending, and
making ducks and drakes of everything I had. And so the end of it all is, I
can't marry without my mother (Lady Geith)'s help, and she won't give it, not
though I threatened to cut off the entail."
"You threatened to do what? " asked the next heir, and his face was not pleasant to look at.
 "Cut off the entail," repeated Sir Mark, with some confusion; "of course I had
not the slightest intention of doing anything of the kind, but I thought it
worthwhile to try the effect."
"And what did your mother say?" asked his cousin, with not unnatural interest. 
"Why, she cut up deuced nasty, dared me to do it, and said, if I injured your
prospects in any way, she would make me bitterly repent my imprudence. We had a
devil of a row; and when I suggested that, as we had not heard anything of you
for so long a time, it was as likely as not you were dead, she broke out crying
as if her heart would break. I declare, George," added Sir Mark, quite
seriously, "I sometimes think there was some mistake, and that you are Lady Geith's son, not I."
"Considering how long an heir was looked for, and that I am four years your
senior, the idea seems unlikely," answered his cousin. 
"Anyhow," went on Sir Mark, "my mother (Lady Geith)and I have never stabled our
horses together at all; and now, in a matter where my happiness is really
involved, she won't hold out her finger to help me. She says she will not give
me sixpence to free Snareham during her lifetime, and that at her death she
intends leaving her fortune to you."
"I hope and trust she will do nothing of the kind," said George Geith, and he
said so in good faith. 
"She says she will, and I believe she intends to be as good as her word. I do
not think she ought, you know," added Sir Mark; "I do not see why she should
pass me by, for you; but I would rather you had her money than Mrs Lennor."
"Mrs Lennor is more likely to have the bulk of it than either of us," remarked
his cousin (George Geith); "I wonder what my aunt can see in that woman to
like. I always hated her."
"It was mutual," answered the baronet; "for she always hated you. But my mother
(Lady Geith)does not like her; though she is influenced by what she says, and
takes her word for gospel, I do not believe she likes her. I have often fancied
lately there will be a split there some day; and if it ever does come to that,
my mother (Lady Geith) and I will, I hope, be better friends."
"I trust you will," said George; "and now tell me, what is her objection to Miss Hayles? "
"Want of birth, want of money, want of everything, according to Mrs Lennor's
statement. Absolutely, she says Cissy is not even pretty."
"You should not be surprised at that, remembering she is a woman," observed his cousin. 
"Do you think jealousy makes them so blind?" asked Sir Mark. 
"No; but I know jealousy makes them lie," said George.
"What a queer fellow you have got," observed Sir Mark; and there was silence for a minute.
Then, "How did you get to know the Hayleses? " asked George. "I never recollect
your being there in my time."
"I got to know them when I went over to Morelands to try and learn what had
become of you," replied Sir Mark, "and since that time, whenever I have been in
the country, I have always passed a good deal of time at the rectory; Cissy and
I have been engaged now for nearly three years."
"With Mrs Hayles' full approval, I suppose," remarked George. 
"I believe you; the old lady angled so well for me, that if I had not really
and truly liked Cissy better than any girl I ever saw in my life, I should have
cut Morelands long ago. As it is, I can't stand much of Mrs Hayles. That is the
reason I will not give Snareham to her husband (mr hayles), though she has set
Cissy on to ask me for it many a time. Hang it, she ought to be content. A poor
clergyman does not pick up a baronet for his son-in-law every day."
"What an unsophisticated creature you are," said George, "you do not know your own value at all."
"I know the value of my position, at any rate," retorted Sir Mark, "and you
know as well as I do too, that pretty, and winning, and graceful as my darling
is, she might have stayed unmarried at Morelands till she grew old and ugly,
unless she had taken up with one of her father's curates, and gone home to darn
his socks and make his shirts."
"Baronets were certainly not plentiful in the parish," acquiesced his cousin. 
"I have often wondered," went on Sir Mark, "how you escaped heart-whole, you
were so intimate with the Hayleses, you were so much with Cissy."
"I had other things to think about," answered George, shortly; "if you had been
compelled to work for your living, and thinking, like myself, how to work to
better purpose, you would scarcely have had leisure to get into a mess with Miss Hayles."
"Perhaps so," replied Sir Mark, "and yet I am surprised. Your duties at
Morelands could scarcely have kept you so constantly employed as all that comes to."
"It was how to get away from Morelands, and what to be at when I was away, that
occupied my thoughts," said the accountant. 
"And what the deuce made you want to get away? " asked his cousin. 
"I wanted to better my condition," was the reply. 
"Very likely; but it was not that took you off from Morelands like a flash of
lightning, and prevented you writing to one of us all these years. Come now,
George, I have been frank with you: make a clean breast to me in return. Why did you go?"
"That is my secret," said the accountant. "One which I do not mean to confide even to you."
"What a confounded shame," cried Sir Mark. "There is nothing I wouldn't tell you."
"Because at present you have nothing to say which you would not tell to
anybody. When you are so rich as to own a secret, you will get a casket and
lock it up, and not look at it too often even yourself."
"Well, as far as I know myself, I would keep nothing back from you," said the baronet.
 "Which shows how very little you do know of yourself," answered his cousin.
"But at any rate, Mark, I cannot tell you the whole of my reasons for leaving
Morelands and the Church. They were sufficient, as I thought, and the step has
turned out well. Do not ask me any more about it, there's a good fellow; but
accept as a whole truth the half one, that I went away to better my condition."
"Only one question, George," began Sir Mark, "could money--" but the
accountant, laying a hand on his arm, stopped him with  
"Do you forget what I told you once when we were both but lads, that I had
promised my mother (rose geith) never to take any money or favour from Lady
Geith or you, except the living your father intended for me. You know she never
accepted help, and I know she often stood sorely in need of it; and though I
may never now ascertain her reasons for requiring such a promise, I intend to
keep my word faithfully."
"Now, do not say that," pleaded Sir Mark, "for I was going to ask you if an
awful thing they call capital be not essential in business, and about to offer  "
"Dreadfully hard up though you are yourself, to find me money enough to make my
fortune," finished George with a smile. "Thank you all the same, but it cannot
be. Were I doing badly, I could not use your purse; and as I am doing well, I
do not need it. And now I must bid you good-bye, if I mean to get to London to-night."
"We could not catch the express possibly," said the baronet, "so make yourself
happy for the night. I am quite serious," added Sir Mark, "and if you doubt it,
there is 'Bradshaw,' and there is my watch, which is right to a minute. You
see, the express must have passed the junction a quarter of an hour since. If
it be a matter of consequence to you, George, I am sorry, upon my word I am."
So was Mr Geith; he had not intended to stay the night at the castle; but he
could not help himself now. 
"It is all the better for me," said the baronet, "but I did not intend to let
you be late for all that. I wish you would come and stay with me here for a
month or two. It would do you a world of good."
"And what would become of my business?" asked George. 
"Business be hanged," retorted Mark. "By the by, what did you say your business was?"
"I am an accountant," said his cousin. 
"Oh, I remember; you were always a great fellow for figures. Well now, tell me,
do not accountants look into estates, and see how people really stand, and what
they owe, and what they have?"
"Yes, I often have to do that, both for bankrupts and folks who are solvent enough."
"Well, that is just what I want done," answered the baronet. "I want to know
how I stand, and how long it would take me to clear the property, and what the
surplus timber would realize if sold. You could come down here and look into
things for me, I suppose? I wish you would. I know no more than the man in the
moon how I am really situated." 
"I could not come here myself," said George, who did not want to do so; "but I
might send down a person to value the timber, and then it would be easier to
ascertain your exact position. I should recommend you to face that, whether you
effect a reconciliation with your mother (lady geith) or not." 
"There is no chance of a reconciliation with her unless  "
"Unless what?" asked his cousin, who well knew what was coming. 
"Unless you would go to my mother (Lady Geith) and talk the matter over with
her. She would consent to my marriage if you asked her, I have no doubt; and I
should be grateful to you for ever."
"That might depend on whether Miss Hayles made a good wife or not, I should
say," answered George a little cynically; "but without any reference to future
gratitude at all, if it will oblige you in the present, I am quite ready to go
to my aunt on your behalf. I can but fail."
"I do not know how to thank you," exclaimed the baronet. 
"There is not the least necessity for you to try," answered George Geith,
quietly. "If I can make peace between you and your mother (Lady Geith), it will
be but a very humble return for her kindness to me. All the pleasant days I can
ever remember to have spent I owed to her; and though you and she cannot agree,
Mark, I maintain there never breathed a better woman, nor a truer lady."
Having given utterance to which opinion, the accountant rose, as if to end the
conversation, and walking to one of the windows, put aside the heavy curtains
and looked out into the night.
While the cousins were talking, the moon had been climbing high into the
heavens, and now bathed the woods and fields surrounding Snareham Castle in a
flood of silver light. 
"Will you take me round the old place, Mark?" asked George. "It may be many a
long day before I see it again;" and the pair went out into the gardens, from
whence they passed into the shrubberies, and then wandered back to the upper
terrace, which they paced slowly, side by side.
The old castle, with its new wings, flung a shadow over the two kinsmen, and
from the building the ground sloped sharply down the hill-side to the village
of Great Snareham, that lay in the valley beneath.
Over the lower woods, George could see the tower of Great Snareham church
rising above the trees. Buried in one of its vaults lay all his ancestors
(geith ancestors), and all his deceased relations, except it might be the two
drowned sons of Mrs Arthur Geith, whose bodies had never been recovered. Two
more (other two drowned sons), whose corpses were washed ashore after the
accident which left her childless, slept there tranquilly, as well as the late
baronet, and his brother, the Rev. Adolphus Geith, and George's grand uncle
(Waterloo Geith), that gallant Geith who came back from Waterloo covered with
wounds, to die. For generations the Geiths had been so small a band that the
great house gathered its dead jealously together. Brothers, and nephews, and
cousins, however far divided in life, were brought home to the family estate,
and buried side by side. It had often been remarked in George's hearing, how
few the coffins were which sufficed to contain those who had carried the name
through previous centuries, and yet, so far as could be ascertained, none save
the two boys were missing.
 Some such observation the accountant made at length to his cousin, who
answered: "Yes, there are two others, the son and the grandson of that old Sir
Harry, who fought so well for King Charles. When we were clearing out the
Norman Tower, we came on the son (Walter Geith the Parliamentarian)'s portrait,
hanging in a dark passage with its face to the wall, and the word traitor
painted over the picture. I cannot have the word obliterated without destroying
the face, so I have hung it up in the gallery with an addendum of my own below.
(Walter Geith the Parliamentarian) took the side of the Parliament, and fell at
Cropready Bridge. (Walter Geith's wife) brought the body here, but across the
moat which lay where the ladies' flower-garden is now, Sir Harry cursed him,
and her, and her unborn child, and prayed that the spawn of a traitor might
never be master of Snareham.
"'Whereupon,' says the manuscript from which I derived my information, 'the
lady bade the men who carried her husband (Walter Geith the Parliamentarian)'s
body place the corpse on the ground, and she kneeled down beside it and kissed
his forehead, and then prayed in return: "'That if no son, or son's son, of the
dead man (Walter Geith the Parliamentarian) ruled at Snareham, the estate might
never pass from father to son, but come to be owned by strangers, and the name
blotted out for ever.'
"A nice wish," finished Sir Mark; "but the poor soul (Walter Geith's wife) was
beside herself with grief. After she had finished her prayer, she rose and went
away with her dead to the old parsonage house, where the then clergyman, who
had known her husband from a boy, took her in and gave her food and shelter.
Two days after, she died in giving birth to a still-born child  a son; and they
laid the three in one grave in the churchyard, together. So far the story; now
for a strange thing about the portrait. It is as like you as it can be. Shall
we go in and look at it?" and Sir Mark led the way across many a room, and
along many a passage into the picture gallery, which was little more than a
broad corridor, lighted by three long windows, and ornamented at each end by a steel mirror.
There were many male Geiths and their wives; the former, frank, Saxon-looking
men; the latter, stiff, prudish dames, holding flower in hand or hawk on wrist,
with a certain stately solemnity.
 The daughters of the house were abundant, the sons few and far between;
surrounded by a bevy of girls, hung Sir Harry, the Royalist, whilst at a little
distance from him was suspended the portrait of his only son (walter geith the
parliamentarian). From corner to corner of the picture ran the disfiguring
letters, but still through the word, as through the bars of a prison, the
grave, thoughtful face looked down on the last males of an ancient house. 
Over the neck of his horse (walter geith's horse) an arm was thrown; the left
hand held a plumed hat; long, dark curls fell over his shoulders, and a
countenance which might have been George Geith's, had George ever looked
handsome, stood out from the canvas. 
"It is you, George, to a certainty," remarked his cousin (Mark Geith), after a
long pause. "We always said we could not tell where you had got your face, but
we know now. It is strange how some members of a family cast back, is it not?"
"I wonder," was the accountant's reply, "if that son (her unborn child) did
die, or whether he lived and had children?"
"Whether he did or not," observed Sir Mark, a little coldly, "makes the marvel
none the less. Neither my father, nor your father, or even uncle Arthur,
resembled this man, and yet they three were brothers."
"True," answered George, as he passed over to look at the portrait of the late baronet. 
How well he remembered the face, bold, daring, frank, sensual, handsome, smiling. 
From father (the late sir mark) to son (mark geith) George Geith glanced critically. 
"There can be no question about your descent, Mark," he said at length. 
"So I tell Mrs Arthur, but she says she cannot trace the likeness," answered
the baronet, with a somewhat forced laugh. 
"Then she must be blind," was the accountant's comment; and as he turned away,
those who knew George Geith well could have told that he was something more
than satisfied, and something less than pleased. 
CHAPTER 9. BACK TO TOWN. 

Through the night George Geith lay awake thinking; or, rather, he lay passive,
whilst all manner of vague ideas chased each other through his mind. The events
of the day, the confessions of Mark, olden memories, future plans, filled the
mental canvas to overflowing; whilst over all these lay a kind of hazy wonder
as to whether Mark were really the rightful owner of Snareham, as to what was
the mystery lying between him and his mother. From boyhood Lady Geith had never
cared for him. An only son, the heir of a large estate, he could do no right in
her eyes. She had tried to be just, George knew, but George knew likewise that
her trials in this respect had sometimes proved signal failures. 
He could remember the triumphant pride of the late Sir Mark in his child, but
he had never seen Lady Geith evince any pride in her son save when Mrs Arthur
Geith was present, at which periods she would have brought down the moon, could
her so doing have pleasured the future baronet. Mrs Arthur had never been a
friend to Mark. She had tried to sow enmity between him and George; she said
openly her nephew was illegitimate, and her sister-in-law - but as her remarks
were slanderous they need not be repeated here. As Lady Geith had disliked her
husband, so Mrs Arthur Geith disliked her. People knew that the Geiths had
played at cross-purposes with their wives; that Mrs Arthur would fain have
stood in her ladyship's shoes, and that her ladyship (lady geith) would gladly
have taken her fortune and person to the country vicarage where Adolphus Geith
made his humble home; so perhaps Lady Geith's indifference to her son (Mark)
arose in dislike to his father (the late sir mark), and her liking for George
out of heart-breaking memories of the man she once hoped to marry.
The more he tried to unravel the skein, the more tangled it grew. Was Mark, as
had once been suggested by Mrs Arthur, his brother? That was utterly
impossible; for his mother (rose geith) would never have sold her own flesh and
blood to aid a deception. Had Mark been changed at nurse? His likeness to his
father (the late sir mark) forbade that idea. Had the late baronet introduced a
false heir into the family? Lady Geith would never have tolerated such an
intrusion; she would only have been too glad to tell the story years before,
and confound the plans of both father and child. There was but one solution of
the enigma, which George Geith did not reject as worthless. 
A previous contract, a living wife, which rendered Lady Geith's marriage null
and void, and her children (mark geith) (lettice geith) illegitimate. 
Might not this, as the years went on, account for much which had puzzled George
and piqued the curiosity of society? Her keen desire for him to marry Lettice,
her only daughter; her laying them out for each other from the time they were
children, and weeping so bitterly when she told George his little wife was
dead; might she not in this way have wished to make him reparation? Might her
leaving him her fortune not be, after all, but some plan of doing justice at
last? Mrs Lennor possibly knew of the prior connection; that might account for
the influence she exercised over his aunt. His mother might have guessed the
truth and broken off her intimacy with her sister-in-law (rose geith) in consequence.
If this were so, George could pity; ay, and though he was the loser by the
fraud, forgive. As for any insinuation which made Lady Geith a deliberate
sinner and hypocrite, the accountant indignantly rejected the idea. He had ever
found Lady Geith thoughtful, and good, and kind; and he was not going to have
his faith in her destroyed, even though his own but at this point the
accountant shook his thoughts aside for a moment. 
Was he going mad? Was he about to turn imaginative in his practical manhood?
What reason had he to suppose that Mark's title to Snareham was other than
good, beyond Mrs Arthur's angry assertions and the old tradition, the origin of
which he had just learnt, that no son would ever succeed his father at the castle? 
Till Mark's time, no son, for generations, ever had. That was curious! Mark
himself had remarked he was glad to break the spell, and George had drily replied: 
"I do not doubt it, as you benefit by the change."
But was George going to be influenced by old women's tales? Was he going to
leave his business to run after a will-o'-the wisp? If Snareham brought bad
nights and evils thoughts; if it were a snare to sense, and a lure to
discontent; if it were a foe to domestic happiness, a cause of repining and
dissatisfaction, George Geith would have none of it. He would go back to
London, and work, and fight and win. He would, being a poor man, renounce the
position which none but a rich man could occupy with honour. He would be no
hanger-on of a great house; he would have no heart-burnings, no such
speculations as disturbed him now, for the future. And he closed his eyes and
tried to go to sleep. Then the face of the Puritan obtruded itself; then he saw
Cissy Hayles gliding along the terraces, a very charming Lady Geith; then he
was back in Fen Court, labouring to free himself from the old chains; then he
was at Morelands; then quarrelling with Mrs Hayles; again shrinking from the
rector (mr hayles)'s statement that he knew why he had left the Church; but at
last all the distorted shapes faded away, and left the over-tired man sleeping quietly. 
Next morning when he awoke, the fantastic procession of the night was gone, and
George Geith arose, and dressed himself quickly, in order to catch the first up-train to London. 
"So, you won't stay," said his cousin. "You won't be sociable, and come and
relieve the tedium of a poor devil's life; but you will go back to the City and
serve Mammon for seven years longer. Well, I won't say you are wrong; I am
satisfied nature made a mistake when she ever gave a Geith a fortune. We are a
race intended to work, and you are going to prove the truth of my proposition.
You will be rich some day when I am poor. When I have made all Snareham a pond
to float my ducks, you will be buying properties, and standing for the county.
When I am retrenching on the continent, you will be a great man in London."
"I shall never be a great man anywhere," George replied, and yet his thoughts
belied his words. He was looking forward to wealth, position, consideration;
and if these things do not constitute greatness to the children of this world,
I should like to know what does. 
"I wish you would let me give you a leg up," observed Sir Mark. 
"Thank you heartily," answered George, picking his phrases out of his cousin's
vocabulary; "but if ever I reach the winning post, I should like to be able to
say: I chose my horse; I trained him; I mounted, and I rode the race without a
helping hand from anybody."
"You are as obstinate as old Sir Harry," remarked his cousin, peevishly: "but
if you will not be helped, and if you will go, it is time we were on the road.
When do you think you can see my mother (Lady Geith)? You perceive I am not
above asking a favour from you."
"The rich man confers a favour on the poor by requesting his services," said
George, with that bitterness which cropped up, every now and then, to the
surface; "but a favour crushes the poor man, and destroys his liberty of action."
"Well, I'll be hanged," retorted Sir Mark, "if I'd see things with your eyes for a dukedom."
"Things stand in different lights for you and me," was the accountant's
tranquil reply; "and it is, therefore, natural they should look different to us."
And with this truism, George Geith may be said to have taken his leave of
Snareham Castle; for five minutes afterwards the cousins were driving away from
its entrance-gates to the station, as fast as Sir Mark's favourite horse could take them.
They had no time to spare; indeed, as the baronet pulled up, they could see the
express coming grandly along the line. 
"Good-bye; do come to see me soon again," said Sir Mark, standing outside the
carriage-door, and grasping hands with his cousin. 
"Good-bye, Mark, and thank you. I will be sure to write whenever I have seen-"
But the train was off, and George could not finish his sentence. The baronet
waved his hand in token of farewell, and already the train was panting out of
the station, and the cousins were parted once again. 
But George caught another glimpse of his relative at a curve where the line
crossed the road leading to Snareham Castle. Up the highway, the accountant
could see that terrible black horse come tearing on. 
For an instant, Mark slackened the reins whilst he nodded in answer to his
cousin's signal of recognition; and taking advantage of this oversight, the
animal made a leap forward, and then started off at full gallop under the
archway over which the train was passing. 
Shifting his position to the other window, George watched the dog-cart spinning
away towards Snareham Castle, with Mark leaning back in it, and pulling in the
frightened animal with all his might. Luckily it was up-hill the whole way to
Snareham from the station, and the accountant had the satisfaction of seeing
that his cousin was getting the best of the battle before a cutting shut horse
and driver, and all the well-remembered places, from his view. And so they
parted; so the one man went back to his castle, and the other to his office; so
the two last young men of an old house turned each into his separate path. 
It is with that George elected to tread we have to do; so we may just as well
travel back with him to London, and see what he thought of by the way. 
Putting aside the dreams of night  refusing, as in the past he had always done,
when in his sober senses, to speculate on his cousin's anomalous position, or
to think of the possibility of himself ever inheriting Snareham and a title,
George began to consider his own prospects de nouveau, and to raise up a great
Tower of Babel, the golden pinnacles of which touched the skies. Did he mourn
about Cissy Hayles? did he grieve because the little sunbeam of love which had
fallen so softly across the darkness of his heart was proved to have no warmth,
no power of vitality in it? No; George was glad to know Cissy and her mamma
(mrs hayles) as they were  glad to think he had escaped from that danger scathless. 
He fancied how much harder his hard life would be if mated to such a wife as
Cissy; he imagined the horror of having to listen to Mrs H.'s opinions, and
worse still, of having, perhaps, to conform to some of her ideas. He thought of
the tirades against business he should hear if he had the misfortune to be Mrs
Hayles's son-in-law. He had a horrid vision of the way in which society, and
the opinion of the world, and the opinion of dear Cissy's friends would have
been thrown at him by her worthy parent. It is a fine thing to see a woman you
have loved, engaged to be married to a grander person than yourself; for there
is not a flaw, mental or physical, that is not revealed to you then. You change
in a moment from being her lover to being her critic; and she comes out of the
shade she has hitherto affected, and floats up and down in the full sunshine of
self-glorification, in order to show, all unconsciously, the frailty and
flimsiness of the butterfly you would once have passed through brake and
through brier to secure. Many a man, though, will moan, even after a butterfly,
if she be only pretty enough; but George Geith could never have done this. Once
satisfy him the star he worshipped was willing to shine on any one, and there
was an end of his fancy. Should he sit down and mourn because the illusion was
dispelled? Emphatically not. He had not bought the picture, and he was not
going to grieve because he had seen it in a fair light. Let her go. If Mark
liked her, well and good. She would make a good wife for a baronet; but for a
poor man, for a struggling man  gracious heavens! what right had a poor and
struggling man to think of a wife at all? What were wives? Curses sometimes,
luxuries always, helpmates never. Why, even in the garden of Eden, George
reflected, Adam's wife could not behave herself, but must needs bring trouble
to her husband and all that came after him. No, he decided against matrimony
altogether; he reflected that money, which could buy all things, was the only
solid good; and as he knew by experience that industry could command money, he
returned to London resolved to think of business more persistently than ever,
to make wealth his object, work his means. 
Hitherto he had met with no check in his business, and like most men who have
done a small certain trade, and kept their accounts close up, he fancied that
he should, with prudence, be able gradually to increase his connection, and
continue as fortunate in the future as he had been in the past. 
He forgot then, what he had been told in his youth, viz., that a man never
makes a good rider till he has been thrown. Had he remembered this, he might
have known that the management of the business steed is rarely understood by
those who have not, some time or other, licked the dust. 
There! a sudden change in the markets, the failure of a good house; the upset
of a basket holding all his eggs, and the man is down! Help him up, ye
Samaritans; or, at least, stand aside and do not trample him till he can rise of himself. 
He is blinded with mud and dirt; he is stunned by the force of the fall; he is
giddy and confused; but still give him a hand and let him mount again, for he
may do well yet. If he be wise he will not attempt impossibilities. He will
attend to his business, he will eschew marshy ground. He will not try to ride
over spiked walls; he will not exhaust his strength, and then attempt to race
with those who come fresh and powerfully mounted on the ground. He will
remember that misfortune is usually another name for folly; that being
deceived, implies having been over-confident; and so goes on safely to the end. 
But for the man who is always being thrown, my readers, do not waste your pity
on him. Let him get out of the mire as he can; let the boys jeer him when he
talks of accident; let him subside into clerkship  servitude  whatever opens
for him, and believe he is safer there, and that it is better for the community
he should be there, than ruining other people, and running the risk of breaking his own neck. 
One fall, but not a dozen, makes a man cautious. Many a man is courageous
merely because he does not understand danger, and therefore the shock which
teaches prudence is oftentimes the mere prelude to ultimate success. 
This shock George Geith had never felt, and therefore he plunged back into the
business vortex, over-sanguine of victory, over-confident in himself. He
counted the harvests that were to make him rich and independent; he saw the
end, but not the road to it; and as the omnibus that conveyed him from Euston
Square to the City lumbered through the streets, his seat beside the driver was
con verted into a throne, from whence he issued edicts to fate and conferred
honours and favours on himself innumerable. 
When he reached Fen Court there were people waiting the chance of his return.
That was satisfactory. He could recollect the time when it was he who waited,
and not his clients (george's clients). Now, his outer office looked like that
of a prosperous man; and with a certain sense of triumph at the business
success he had achieved, the accountant attended to those who were bringing corn to his mill. 
The first man who entered the inner office (the draper)  that private sanctum
which commanded a view of the churchyard and the trees  was short and stout in
figure, with a white face, and lank, unwholesome-looking hair. He had a great
deal to say about the weather, which did not please him, as a slight rain, that
made the streets greasy, had just set in. 
"Shan't sell six-penn'orth to-day," he opined; "it's well to be you whose trade
don't vary with the weather."
"It is better to be you who make a hundred and fifty per cent when the weather
is fine," retorted Mr Geith. 
"Oh! come now," expostulated the draper, "that is too bad, and you a bachelor."
"The dread of your bills is likely to keep me so," was the reply, whereupon the
pair laughed and got to business. 
Mr Acton's books had fallen into a tangle which he wanted the accountant to
unravel. This was the sum of his first statement, but it soon transpired that
he wanted something else, viz., to have the work done for less than half-price. 
Mr Geith, however, was firm; there were days when he would not listen to any
abatement, and this chanced to be one of them. Moreover, though mentally well
balanced, he could not come down straight away from the terraces of Snareham
Castle to the level of Mr Acton's shop, and so he ended the discussion more
abruptly than was his wont.
"How and ever," said the draper, in reply, "I cannot afford your price nohow.
Five pounds is the outside I can give."
"And ten is my charge, and the least I shall take," answered Mr Geith loftily.
"Then I must carry the work to somebody else, that's all," and Mr Acton
reluctantly took up his hat. 
"That is a matter for you to decide," remarked the accountant, and he turned to
his letters as a signal for the other to go. But the other would not take the hint. 
"You will think about it? " he suggested, after a pause. 
"Certainly not," was the reply, and Mr Geith began cutting open the envelopes. 
"Would another sovereign? " tried the client. 
"Now, Mr Acton," said George, decidedly, "you are but wasting my time and your
own. The lowest price I can take is ten pounds. If you like to give that sum
well and good. If not, well and good still, only I do not make up your books for less."
He had opened his letters by this time, and began reading them, as if Mr Acton
were not standing opposite to him. Business is not improving to the manners.
Lord Chesterfield himself, had he been compelled to earn his bread in the City,
would probably have had to choose between starvation and a polished address. 
George Geith having made his choice at a very early period of his commercial
life, went on perusing his letters whilst Mr Acton watched him. 
At first the draper considered this absorption a ruse, but after a time,
finding no notice taken of him, he removed his arm from the corner of the desk,
and observed: "I will consider the matter, then."
"Very well," answered George. 
"Good-day," said the draper. 
"Good-day," replied the accountant, and the door opening on the landing closed behind that client. 
As it did so, client No. 2 entered from the outer office, and Mr Geith laid down his letters. 
This visitor proved to be the brother of a person in difficulties who wanted a
balance-sheet prepared. The man being steeped in debt was, of course,
indifferent about expense. All he wished was expedition. Could the business be
completed without delay? 
"Assuredly," and the matter was settled. No. 2 went out, and No. 3 came in.
This individual wanted money, and having got it, buttoned his coat, resumed his
umbrella, listed his gloves, and departed, making way for No. 4, who turned out to be Mr Foss. 
"What can I do for you? " asked the accountant, after he had shaken hands with
the young man. "I hope you do not want any business help from me."
"I do and I don't, if you can understand that," answered Mr Foss, with a blush
Miss Gilling might have envied. "I called to ask, if you knew of anybody in want of a clerk."
"Why, do you know any one in want of a situation?" asked Mr Geith. "Yes; I
should be glad of anything I could get," replied Mr Foss, and he blushed again a deeper red. 
"I thought you had such a first-rate berth at Twine's," remarked the accountant. 
"So I had," said the young man, ruefully, "but I got notice on New- Year's day,
and left last Saturday. They pay everybody weekly, from the cashier down, in
that office, and so I'm adrift."
"What is their reason for parting with you?" inquired George. 
"Mr Twine's nephew wanted a place, and mine was the only one they could give him."
"What did you learn there?" asked George, "dock work chiefly, was it not?"
"Yes, and I wrote letters, and used to help the cashier sometimes too. I am a
pretty good hand at accounts," added Mr Foss, with a longing look round Mr
Geith's office, which look made that gentleman smile. 
"Cannot Mr Bemmidge make room for you? "he inquired. 
"He has not work enough for himself," replied the other, "and he knows no one
wanting a clerk. It was he told me to come to you, and said most likely you
would be able to put me in the way of doing something."
"Perhaps you both thought I might be requiring a second clerk myself?" observed
the accountant, at which suggestion Mr Foss coloured to the very roots of his
hair, and took refuge in absolute silence. "I do not know that I can take you
on," continued Mr Geith, after a short pause, "or that, if I could, my place
would be worth your acceptance; but I will think the matter over, and you might
look in again in a day or two. Meantime, if you hear of anything better, do not
consider your self bound in any way to me." And George Geith turned to his
letters again, as a hint to Mr Foss that he considered the business which had
brought him there ended, and that the sooner he lest the office the better he should be pleased. 
"Good afternoon, and thank you," said the young man, who had seen enough of
business to know clearly what the accountant meant; and he was going away
without offering his hand, only that George prevented him. They were not master
and man yet, and perhaps the accountant's conscience accused him for having
been rude to a person who was so very easily snubbed as Harry Foss. At any
rate, he said "Good-bye, and if I can do anything for you, I will," in a tone
which made the applicant's face brighten considerably, and sent him away in a
happier frame of mind than that in which he had been making his exit. 
Before he entered the office he had intended to tell Mr Geith how important a
thing it was for him to get a situation at once; how he had a sister (foss
sister) dependent on him for daily bread; how hard he was able to work, and for
how small a salary he would be willing to labour. He had made up quite a little
volume on his way from Nicholas Lane to Fen Court, but somehow, when he got
into the commercial presence-chamber, the narrative was forgotten, and his fine
sentences were exchanged for the few bald phrases I have set down. He could
have told all about himself to Mr Geith that night at Ivy Cottage; but Mr Geith
in office was a different man from Mr Geith at Andrew Bemmidge's. He was quite
as formidable an individual as Mr Twine, and Mr Twine moved among his clerks
(twine clerks) like an Eastern despot among his slaves. 
If he were accepted at Fen Court, the young man saw, he would, spite of Mr
Bemmidge's acquaintance with his principal, be but a clerk till the end of the
chapter. He was a little surprised, perhaps, but he need not have been, for it
is in the nature of business to make aristocrats of employers, of
millionnaires, and of creditors. And of the importance of marking this, line
broadly, George Geith was well aware, for it is not easy "to blow up" a man who
can answer you on terms of equality; it is a very difficult matter to keep a
clerk straight who is a friend also. 
"If Foss comes, he will have to rough it like anybody else. I can make no
distinctions here," reflected the accountant; from which remark it will be seen
George Geith was fitted for the path he had chosen in all respects. He even
dared to take on a man he knew, and keep him in his place. An experiment on
which, (I the narrator)  think, few in his position would have cared to venture. 
He had got rid of all his clients (george's clients), and was going to answer
his letters, when he heard someone coming up the stairs, and immediately
afterwards his clerk (clerk 1) entered the office to inquire whether Mr
Molozane could see Mr Geith. 
"What can the man want?" groaned the accountant. "Send him in, Simmons; but
remember I cannot be interrupted again till after post-time." Having uttered
which mandate, Mr Geith descended from his stool, and stood with his back to
the fire awaiting Mr Molozane's entrance. 
"I am afraid I am very troublesome," began that gentleman; "if it be
inconvenient for you to speak to me now, I can wait. I am not in any hurry."
"Providing I get my letters finished in time for post, I am quite at your
service," said George, and he motioned his visitor to a chair. 
But Mr Molozane would not sit down. He came and stood before the fireplace, and
looked at the blazing coals, ere he began: "There is no more hope about the mines, Mr Geith." 
"I am sorry to hear that; I trust you are safe."
"No; I could not sell. I wish to God!" went on the poor dupe, vehemently, "I
had come to you twelve months ago, I might have got rid of the shares then; but
that is all past now, so there is no use talking about it."
"What have you heard fresh in the matter?" asked the accountant. 
"The captain of the miners has absconded, and the directors are going to wind
up the concern," and Mr Molozane dropped his hand on the mantel-piece, with a
despairing gesture, as he spoke.
George did not answer for a minute, he only drew that long back breath so
common among business people, and looked away from Mr Molozane ere he spoke. 
"I am afraid it is a bad business," he said, at last; "do you know what the liabilities are?"
"No; I cannot learn anything about them."
"Nor the assets?"
"There are none. The captain (captain of the miners) has taken away close on
20,000 with him. The secretary (punt) says the police are on his track; but I
have no idea they will find him."
"Nor I," answered George; "and if they did it would not benefit you much, for
he is not likely to have the money now. Well, whoever else has lost, one man is sure to be safe."
"Who is that? The captain (captain of the miners)?"
"Your secretary, Punt; he always feathers his nest, no matter who else loses
down. How do the directors purpose winding up?"
"I do not know. Is there more than one way?"
"Yes, there are two; one by which you know the worst at once; and another, by
which you learn it after years. The first has the advantage in one way,
however, it settles the matter immediately; but the second enables a man to
look his position in the face, and see whether he can eventually recover himself."
"Will you tell me exactly," said Mr Molozane, "what the extent of my liability is likely to be."
"That depends entirely upon the amount the company is in debt, and the solvency
of the other shareholders. If all are good men, the loss will be more general
than individual; but if many are men of straw, the payments will have to be
made by the few who are able and willing to do so."
"What do you mean by willing?" asked Mr Molozane. "Is there any choice in the matter?"
"There is no choice for you," answered the accountant; "for others there may be."
"How is my position different from that of others? " inquired Mr Molozane. 
"Your position is not different; but you are, or else I am greatly mistaken.
Men back out of these kind of things every day. They leave the country; they
sell their estates; they get rid of their businesses; they make over their
property to some relative on the first sign of danger. There are a hundred ways
for men to escape the consequences of their own folly; but there is no
honourable way, Mr Molozane, and I should be advising you wrongly if I said there were."
"Then what do you suppose will be the result of it all to me?"
"That depends on the extent of your own property, and of the company's
liabilities. You may not have to pay much, and if you have, you may possess
sufficient to pay everything and still leave a surplus."
"And is there nothing I can do meantime? Am I to sit with my arms folded, and
see my money taken away by thieves?  for I can call them nothing else, Mr
Geith, but thieves, damned thieves!"
"If you mean, can you resist the claim, most certainly not; but you could go
down into Cornwall and see for yourself what the Sythlow Mines are. It has
happened before now that valuable mines have been declared unproductive, and
sold to friends of the directors, who made fortunes whilst the shareholders
were ruined. Remember, I do not think such will prove to be the case in this
instance; but still, if I were you, I should go and judge for myself."
"Thank you; I will follow your advice. And now, Mr Geith, you must not refuse a
fee to-day. I have no one else to come to but you, and no one else to consult
with; and if you decline to receive payment, you will shut me out from the only adviser I have."
And the poor proud gentleman, whose pride had received such a mortal blow
within the last few months, laid down a fee, carefully done up in paper like a
doctor's, on the chimney-piece. So long as he had a sixpence left he did not
want anyone to give him anything, even kindness, for nothing. 
Could the accountant have with any reason accepted the fee, I think he would
have taken it; but, as it was, he pushed the money gently away, and said: "As I
have done nothing for you so far, Mr Molozane, I cannot take a fee; but, unless
you know what you have and what you owe much better than the majority of the
gentlemen with whom I come in contact, you will want an accountant's help ere
long. If you like to come to me then, I will make a charge. Now, however, I cannot."
"But the time I have occupied," urged Mr Molozane. 
"I wish all my clients occupied as little," said George; "I should be either an
idler, or a richer man. I have to listen not merely to business, but also to
family histories here, and nobody thinks of paying me for doing so."
"I wish you would let me pay you, though," entreated Mr Molozane. 
"You shall, certainly, if ever I do any business for you; and, perhaps, if you
ascertain anything about the mines you will let me know. Some of my clients
(george's clients) may be interested in the matter, for aught I can tell; and,
at any rate, I like to be 'up' in these things. I hope the affair may not turn
out so badly as you fear."
"It cannot turn out worse at any rate," said the country gentleman, (ambrose
molozane) mournfully, and he held out his hand in farewell. 
George could not but notice how much more meekly he performed this ceremony
than on the occasion of his previous visits. A mightier leveller, so far as
this world is concerned, than death, was bringing the man who despised trade,
down to something lower far than any honest calling. 
Away in the distance he saw beggary looming before him; and with that awful
presence growing clearer and clearer at every step, the old social distinctions
faded into insignificance, and Ambrose Alfred Molozane, Esq., of Molozane Park,
in the county of Herts, discovered that there was some faint comfort to be
derived from telling his anxieties and his misery, even to a man who mixed with
low people, and transacted business in Fen Court.
CHAPTER 10. LADY GEITH. 

When Mr Molozane came out of Mr Geith's office, the January day was drawing to
a close, and darkness and a penetrating rain were striving which should reach the City first. 
Up and down Fenchurch Street the country gentleman looked disconsolately; not
that he cared about the state of the weather. Hail or sunshine, it was much the
same to him. The Sythlow Mines were not going to make his fortune; nay, were
most probably going to ruin him. What, therefore, did the rain signify? Let it
rain. He did not quarrel with the wet, slippery pavement, the streaming
gutters, the splashing cabs, or the women who carried umbrellas as soldiers
carry fixed bayonets, charging the unhappy passer-by with them. There are
people, it is said, who have some choice concerning the weather and the place
in which they shall be hung; but Mr Molozane could not have understood any
solicitude of this kind. 
He felt the rope about his neck, and nothing could add to the misery of that sensation. 
What did the puddles, which reflected back the light from the gas-lamps,
signify to him? What did the wet signify? What did anything signify? And in
this pleasant frame of mind he proceeded up Cullum Street, and along Leadenhall
Street, and so through the pelting rain to Shoreditch Station, where he sat him
down, to wait patiently till such time as his train should start, and
ruminated, weary and fasting, on his position. 
Sitting there, with the vice of Whitechapel, and the want of Bethnal Green, and
the sin and the misery huddled together to the west of Shoreditch, within
almost a stone's throw of where he sat, he verily believed himself to be the
most wretched man breathing. And yet he had only lost money; while, gracious
heavens! there were those out on the street he had just left out, with the
gas-lamps streaming on their haggard faces  out reeling away from the doors of
gin palaces  out, with thin soaking garments, with poor shoes that let the mud
in at every step, who had lost money, and home, and virtue, and so far as man
could tell, their souls too. (I the narrator) do not know how it is, that no
depth of misery seems able to make its cry heard unto another; that
wretchedness is ever blind to the fact of there being a trouble greater and
more hopeless than its own; that whatever sorrow comes to a man, he considers
it the worst mortality can be called on to suffer. It is not so with joy. From
the hill-tops of success and pleasure come glad shouts of triumph over the
plain; and humanity, no matter on how lofty a peak it stands, ever considers
that the cries are borne down to its level, from higher pinnacles than its own.
Success knows no contentment, wretchedness no alleviation. The one is all eyes,
ears, and attention, and the other, blind, deaf, sullen. "Why should they have
more than I? "shouts the man who ought to be happy. "Was ever mortal so hardly
dealt with? "is the groan of each of us who feels the lash of trouble laid
never so lightly on his back. 
"What have I done that this trouble should have come upon me?" thought Mr
Molozane as he sat in the dingy waiting room. 
"I wonder if any of those I see passing by have made such miserable failures of
their lives as I," murmured Lady Geith, looking with weary eyes out into the
gathering darkness. And she sighed. With reason too, for she had sinned. And
not all the tears she could weep, not all the groans she could utter, might
ever undo the wrong she had done, or make reparation for it. Yet it may fairly
be questioned whether Lady Geith ever fully realized to herself the enormity of
the crime of which she had been guilty. She felt the inconvenience it entailed
on herself and others. She would have given much to have been able to get out
of the tangle she herself had woven. She was very sorry. She had suffered
acutely. But, nevertheless, (I the narrator) do not think she knew, so far, the
meaning of the word repentance. 
She did not know what it was to lie down with her sorrow at night, and get up
with it in the morning. She did not know what it was to weep tears that blister
the heart instead of relieving it. She had not the faintest conception of what
it is to turn back upon the road of evil, and facing the past with its sin and
its sorrow, strive to do right, at last, let the cost be what it will. 
She had never been taught what God's providence teaches to every willing
scholar sooner or later, that a sin may never remain unatoned for; that wrong
must be righted by someone. The days of the Lord are long; years, it may be,
pass away, and the morning when the fault was committed seems so far back in
our reckoning of time, that we forget the immutable law of retribution. But the
noontide, and the evening, and the night come on for all that, and the sins of
the fathers are visited upon the children, and the wrong is righted at last,
when many weep for the crime of one, and the innocent are swept in the
whirlpool which, it was thought, could not touch even the guilty. 
"Turn back; turn back!" is the cry of experience to the inexperienced, "whilst
it is yet time. You cannot flee from your sin for ever. There may be a mid-day
in your life, it is true, when the wrong can throw no shadow; but the wrong is
travelling with you, before you, behind you, beside you, for all that. And you
must face your trouble now or hereafter; let it be now when you know the worst,
when you know who will suffer, who will be benefited. In the future there will
be wives, now unmarried; children, yet unborn; relations, who are now
strangers; enemies, who, for so far, are indifferent. There is a great
multitude travelling on to meet you in the distance, who will all be involved
in your trouble; who will weep; who will curse; who will triumph; who will sin;
and who will suffer anguish because of this wrong, which you are permitting to
rush onward towards them. 'Turn back; turn back!' and conscience, echoing the
cry, warns the sinner to strive to right the wrong whilst there is yet time to do it."
To Lady Geith experience and conscience had both cried in vain. She was sorry;
she had repented; she would have retraced her roads could she have taken one
entire leaf out of her life, and undone the deception which had rendered her
existence miserable. Failing this, she decided to drift on with the tide, to
repair her fault in her own way, and to make such compromises with her
conscience as might ensure its silence and approval.
She was much like a child who has done mischief, and who, while sorry for
having done it, thinks if it can but conceal the fault, there will be an end of
the matter. Great consequences springing from little causes; great trees
growing silently out of the tiniest seeds, were things Lady Geith did not think
about. Present inconvenience she felt, and tried to get rid of; but she now
resolutely shut her eyes to the question of future trouble and injustice. Had
not her life been a burden to her? Had she not wept, and suffered, and repented? 
What more could be demanded of her? Let the irrevocable past lie buried. 
But somehow the past would not lie buried. It had a way of appearing before
her, which was unpleasant in the extreme. Every now and then a darkness came
over her soul, and out of the darkness there crept the old, old days, each with
its story, each with its trouble. 
For Lady Geith's had not been a happy life. Granted that to a great extent she
had made her own unhappiness. What then? Why, then, that was no comfort; and
so, sitting in the dusk, in Halkin Street, looking out at the wet pavement, at
the glimmering lamps, she found. 
Over years and years she travelled, leaning back in her chair listening to the
steps of the passers-by, hearing the sound of distant street-organs, watching
the rain as it came down faster and faster; she journeyed quicker than ever
express train swept across England, from age to youth, to her girlhood, to the
happy, and hopeful, and innocent long ago. 
What had she made of the road since traversed? Watch that which she is
contemplating, and then judge. 
She is looking at a hopeless love; hopeless, not merely because the man she
loved was poor, but because he did not return the love she, a great heiress,
was wasting on him. In that she had little to blame herself. With Adolphus
Geith, who never thought that a decorous flirtation, conducted on the most
religious principles, and in an unexceptionably clerical manner, could bear
bitter fruit to any one, perhaps the case was different. He ought to have
thought, he ought to have known. He said so himself when he found the strength
and weakness of the motherless girl (lady geith), who had never before
stretched out her hand towards anything without possessing it. Her weakness was
loving him, her strength forgiving him, and heaping such coals of fire on his
head by her generosity that she developed everything which was good in the
man's nature, and caused his life to be a more useful one than it could ever
have been, had he not met her. She had outlived that love; she had put it aside
as a shame and a grief, and looking back, she could see that the one good thing
she could remember doing was loving the clergyman's wife, and being mother,
friend, sister, all in one, to that most lovable of God's creatures, beautiful,
fragile, light haired, blue-eyed, tender-hearted Rose Stanhope! Thinking of
her, spanning in a moment all the years that lay between the present and that
day when she saw Adolphus Geith's chosen bride for the first time, tears came
into Lady Geith's eyes, and rolled slowly down her cheeks. What a clinging,
tender plant it was: how it twined itself around the young heiress, ever
putting forth some fresh tendril of sympathy and affection as time went by, and
brought trouble with it to her friend. What a slight, frail thing it seemed,
and yet the day came when Lady Geith felt it tear itself away, and renounce her. 
"I think my secret killed her," thought Lady Geith, and the thought might have
been true, for circumstances made the secret a very grievous one to keep, and
Rose Geith felt the struggle between right and wrong, between gratitude and
self-interest, severely. 
Had she lived, it is a question whether she could have continued mute; but she
died, and Lady Geith's secret remained intact. 
The reader, of course, by this time guesses what that secret was; but before
confirming the truth of his idea, (I the narrator) must go back a little and
tell how the temptation arose; how Lady Geith came to be so false a woman. 
When first she knew the man she afterwards wed, there were three Geiths,
brothers; three all unmarried; one, (the late sir Mark), lived with his uncle
at Snareham Castle; one, (uncle Arthur), was a barrister with very few briefs;
while Adolphus was curate of Little Snareham, in which parish her father was
lord of the manor squire, magistrate, what you will, providing always it be
respectable, pompous, worldly, and wealthy. 
Squire Hollington was a man of old family; his ancestors had been Druids, and
he was able to trace them from the period Stonehenge was erected down to the
nineteenth century. But long though his pedigree might be, it was not longer
than his purse. From the Druids, or from some nearer relatives, he inherited
estates which brought him in six or seven thousand a year, and from his mother
(hollington's mother) a private fortune of fifty thousand pounds, which he
would infallibly have secured to his nephew (harold) and the property, had not
that unhappy young man not been led in an evil moment to question the
truthfulness of their genealogical records. 
He only doubted the Druids, but that was sufficient. The (squire hollington)
abandoned the idea of a match between him and his daughter then and there, and
made no objections to Mark Geith when he came to woo the heiress. Mark Geith
was the heir apparent of Snareham Castle and the baronetage. The Geiths (geith
ancestors) were people of old family also. There was not a drop of blood in
their veins but could be proved of the due shade of crimson. It had been poured
out like water in the service of kings, good, bad, and indifferent; it had
never mingled with impure streams. The Geiths' wives had been ever gentlewomen;
some poor and some plain it might be, but still ladies. There had never, so far
as he could hear, been a Geith mad, or epileptic, or consumptive, or
scrofulous, and this was an immense recommendation. 
"If pure blood could keep men from death, the Hollingtons would be immortal,"
he used to boast. "There never was one of us," and the "us " included the
Druids, (I the narrator) may remark, "married into a diseased family, until my
brother (hollington brother) chose for his wife (hollington sister-in-law) a
woman whose father (hollington father-in-law) was in trade and died of
softening of the brain. And look at the result; look at Harold; an effeminate,
delicate, lisping creature, who disputes our pedigree, and thinks all men are equal."
There was no fear of Mark Geith thinking all men equal, so long as it buttered
his bread to believe otherwise, wherefore he humoured the old man (Squire
Hollington) to the top of his bent, and made himself as agreeable as might be
to the daughter (Lady Geith), who married the elder brother after loving the
younger, and who was so simple as never to think that a prospective baronet
might be marrying her less for what she was, than for what she had. 
The Hollington property, that is, the property which was entailed, passed on
the death of the old squire to his nephew (harold); but over and above this,
there were lands, and houses, and moneys in the funds which came to Lady Geith
strictly secured to her for her sole and separate use. 
That his daughter should remain childless never entered into the calculations
of the (squire hollington). No Hollington's quiver had ever been destitute of
juvenile arrows. Indeed, but that death had proved as kind as nature, they
might have sometimes seemed inconveniently full. Squire Hollington's father,
for instance, was the eldest of a family of thirteen. Squire Hollington himself
had three brothers and seven sisters. His wife bore him four daughters and two
sons; but one of the former died in infancy, and a couple more a few years
later of scarletina; whilst, as for the sons, the eldest, Cedric, was killed by
a fall from his horse; and the youngest sank in India under the climate. People
said he had trusted too much to the Hollington constitution, and perhaps this
was true. Anyhow, he died and left the (squire hollington) with only one child,
Selina, who became Mrs -, and afterwards Lady Geith. 
That she should not rear sons and daughters, never, as (I the narrator) said
before, crossed Squire Hollington's mind, and he therefore went to his grave in
peace, and left his money, as stated, to his daughter. 
Just then, Arthur Geith, the barrister, dropped matrimonially into what his
friends considered a good thing, and took unto himself a brewer's daughter (mrs
arthur), who brought to her new home a fortune of a hundred thousand pounds,
which had been made out of Thames water, hops, and malt. It was a snug
certainty for a struggling and penniless man, and Arthur Geith cared very
little for the fact that his wife (mrs arthur) had just set her cap at the
prospective baronet (the late sir mark), and failed to catch him. He was an
easy-going man, who hated work and loved pleasure, and who was willing to pay
any price for being landed high and dry above the sea of poverty, in which his
early youth had been passed. For all the Geiths, save the heads of the family,
were poor as church mice. Till the death of his uncle, the eldest brother (the
late sir mark), the prospective heir, had only an allowance of five hundred a
year and his wife's fortune.
Mrs Arthur Geith's money, and Mrs Arthur Geith herself, proved eventually
causes of dissension amongst the Geith clan. She ruled her husband, she reduced
him to a mere cipher, she snubbed the clergyman (adolphus), she insulted his
wife (rose geith), and as the years rolled by and brought no children with them
to Snareham Castle, she began to regard herself as presumptive Lady Geith, and
manager of the property. She had five sons and two daughters  five fine lads
stood between Adolphus Geith's only living boy and the title. There was no
child at Snareham, had never been one, and so Mrs Arthur was everlastingly
taking her boys to the Castle, and exhibiting the eldest to visitors as "the heir."
A well-bred woman had no chance of victory in the vulgar warfare of petty
annoyances which Mrs Arthur waged. As though Lady Geith's marriage had not
proved unhappy enough, without any aggravating circumstances being thrown into
the scale, Mrs Arthur must needs put her hand on the beam and make her
sister-in-law more wretched still. The culminating point came when Sir Mark
"wished to God that he had a child to rid him of that woman's airs."
"I have heard," answered Lady Geith, "that in your family no son ever succeeds
his father, so there would seem to be little use in having one."
On which Sir Mark d-d old proverbs, and cursed his luck, and left his wife in tears. 
Tears were Lady Geith's most grievous sin in her husband's eyes. He once said
she looked more like his mother than his wife, and the remark, though brutal,
was true, for at eight-and twenty, ten years after her most ill-assorted
marriage, Lady Geith was a miserable, discontented, peevish woman. 
Not that she cared, in reality, about children of her own succeeding to the
title. If Mrs Arthur's boys had been out of the way, she could have looked with
complacency on Adolphus Geith's son as the future heir of Snareham; but as it
was, the feud between the two women had grown to hatred, and to have caused
annoyance to her sister-in-law, to have ensured her plans being frustrated,
Lady Geith would cheerfully have gone down to the family vault, and stretched
herself in her coffin with a smile. 
Matters had come to this pass, when one Midsummer- day, after Mrs Arthur had
been exhibiting her eldest-born to some visitors, Miss Teddesley, who was Lady
Geith's companion, remarked in her softest, lowest tone  "Do you not think,
(Mrs Arthur Geith), that calling your dear boy the heir, may be a little premature?"
"How  why  what do you mean? " asked the other. 
"Only, that if a son were to come, it might cause  "
"It is not possible," interrupted Mrs Arthur, and she turned first red and then
white at the bare suggestion. 
"I think it possible," said Miss Teddesley, significantly; "but of course I am
not supposed to think at all," and she sighed and folded her hands demurely, as
though whilst submitting to the supposition, she denied its accuracy. 
"My dear Miss Teddesley," began Mrs Arthur (when had she ever spoken civilly to
the companion before), "what are your reasons for making such an extraordinary
statement? I cannot believe it possible."
"I would not then, (Mrs Arthur Geith)," observed the companion (miss
teddesley), soothingly. "If my idea should prove correct, the evil will be bad
enough when it comes without anticipating it."
"Many women," went on Mrs Arthur, "would say they were glad  would lie and be
hypocrites; but I am no hypocrite, thank God; and if Lady Geith should have a
child, I shall always say mine has been cheated out of his inheritance."
"But I may be mistaken," said the companion (miss teddesley), by way of
consolation; "and, besides, even if I am not, it may be a girl."
"And if it be," retorted (Mrs Arthur Geith), "there will be half-a dozen sons
afterwards," and she flung herself on a sofa, and cried with rage and disappointment.
 "I shall ask Selina," she said at last. "Don't talk to me about compromising
you. If you wanted the matter kept secret you ought to have held your tongue." 
And with this trite remark, Mrs Arthur dried her eyes, and went off straightway
to her sister-in-law, to whom she put her question sharply and suddenly. Taken
by surprise, Lady Geith's denial was both startled and confused. She was so
utterly astounded at Miss Teddesley's idea, she was so delighted at (Mrs Arthur
Geith)'s evident chagrin, she felt herself placed at once in so different a
position to that she had hitherto occupied, that her negative implied an
affirmative to the listener's understanding, and Mrs Arthur went home
mystified, crestfallen, and furious. 
Then Miss Teddesley came stealing into Lady Geith's dressing-room. That she was
not supposed to think was quite a fiction got up for Mrs Arthur's benefit,
because Miss Teddesley did think to great purpose, and could talk too, for that matter. 
Not even Lady Geith hated Mrs Arthur with the same intensity as did Miss
Teddesley. Many a slight, many a sneer, which Mrs Arthur had forgotten, were
stored up by the companion(miss teddesley), and thought of as debts to be paid. 
She was as silent, as wily as a serpent, and she watched her opportunity till
she could get in the thin end of a wedge, destined to part Mrs Arthur and
Snareham as a possession for ever. It was she who tempted Lady Geith, who with
her clear head laid out a scheme for bringing a false heir to Snareham, which
scheme was not guessed at by any one save Rose Geith. 
"I am as certain of it, as I am that I am talking to you," said she to her
husband (Adolphus Geith). "I have not the faintest shadow of a doubt on the
subject; but what are we to do, what ought we to do?"
What were they to do, indeed? In blank dismay, the pair, who though suspicious,
had still no proof wherewith to confirm those suspicions, asked each other that
question day after day, till the opportunity for doing or proving anything was
past, for before the young heir (mark geith) was christened, Adolphus Geith
sickened, and while the joy bells were ringing at Great Snareham, the young wife was left a widow. 
It was not in Rose Geith's nature, however, to suspect such a wrong and hold
her peace to the doer thereof; so the time arrived when there was a scene
between the sisters-in-law, when Lady Geith offered to compensate for the wrong
she had done in money, and Rose Geith flung the offer back at her with scorn. 
"Keep your money," she retorted. "You will need it all, or I am mistaken, to
buy the silence of your accomplices. Neither I nor mine will ever touch a penny
of it. I am sinning enough in keeping your secret without that. May God forgive
us both, Selina," and then she prayed Lady Geith to confess all to her husband
(the late sir mark), to Mrs Arthur Geith, and let the mother, whoever she might
be, have back her child.
In vain all in vain. Lady Geith had gone too far to draw back. She could not
humiliate herself to Mrs Arthur Geith; she could not face the world, her
husband and her friends; and finding all her arguments and entreaties were
urged in vain, Rose Geith went back sorrowfully to her home, and never crossed
the threshold of Snareham Castle after.
She let her boy (george) go there, but from a child she taught him
independence, and made him firm and self-reliant. And on her death-bed, she
made him promise never to accept money, nor favour beyond the merest courtesies
of life, from Lady Geith or her son (mark geith). 
"The day may come, George, when you will thank me for exacting that promise. In
any case, I know it is well for you to give it."
How faithfully George Geith kept his promise we have seen; and his aunt (Lady
Geith) thought of that sitting in the dusk all alone in Halkin Street. 
Changes had taken place in the Geith family during the twenty-eight years that
had elapsed since her ladyship thought fit to foist a fictitious heir (mark
geith) into their domestic annals; but no change, unless, indeed, it might be
the death of her husband (the late sir mark), had occurred to render Lady Geith's life happier. 
So far from the son's advent making matters pleasanter at Snareham Castle, it
had simply made them worse. Long before his birth, Lady Geith knew (the late
Sir Mark) was aware of her deception, and merely winked at it for some purpose
of his own. She could never forget, and she as certainly never forgave, the
sneer with which (the late baronet) received the intelligence of a possible
heir. And yet when the boy (sir mark) came, he liked him; he caressed him; he was proud of him. 
There was something in the way in which the child was greeted, and she
neglected, which galled Lady Geith beyond endurance, and made her almost detest
the lad for whom she had dared and suffered so much. 
Just about the time that the young heir was christened, Miss Teddesley married
and went to China with her husband (captain lennor); but four years afterwards,
when the Geiths returned from that foreign tour, during the course of which
Lettice Geith was born, Mrs Lennor came back with them, a widow, who had not
been left in good circumstances, it appeared, since she resumed her old post as
companion, and devoted herself to Lady Geith with the same assiduity as formerly.
More years passed away, and between sunrise and sunset Mrs Arthur Geith was
left childless. Then Lady Geith stretched forth the right hand of fellowship to
her old enemy, all too late. The loss of her children (arthur geith's
children), and the sudden paralysis of her husband (arthur geith), made the
unhappy woman almost a maniac. There was no measure in her grief, or in her
anger. When she came to Snareham, it was but to reproach Lady Geith, and tell
Mark he was an intruder, an interloper, and illegitimate. And after (the late
baronet)'s death, when Mark absolutely succeeded to the title, she grew rabid,
and became so notorious for her slanderous remarks, that people paid no more
attention to them than if she had been an inmate of the nearest lunatic asylum. 
But (Mrs Arthur Geith), though violent, was not mad. She had grasped a truth
intuitively; and could she have shown any logical steps by which she had
arrived at the conclusion that Lady Geith was somehow, in the matter of her
children, criminal, she would have spared neither time nor money to revenge
herself on her sister-in-law. 
Had she but known it, she was already amply revenged. The deaths of her sons
(arthur geith's children), the paralysis of her husband (arthur geith), would
have left George the certain heir of Snareham, providing Mark had not stood in
the way. And Lady Geith knew that; saw that, by her own evil act, the man she
would have liked best to see master of the old place, was excluded from his
rights. Her plans had succeeded so well, that she was punished through them.
She had laboured to knot the ropes that scourged her. She had saddled herself
with a son (mark geith), and with a companion (miss teddesley), who were the
pests and curses of her daily life; while the rightful presumptive heir of all
that vast property (george) was dwelling, Heaven knew where, and living she
could not even guess how. 
For her brother-in-law (arthur geith) she felt no compunction. At Snareham, or
in London, he would still be a poor, paralytic, useless creature, who could not
enjoy the property if he had it, and to whom the much-coveted baronetage might
never bring back health. But George, the son of the man she had once loved
(adolphus), and of the best friend woman ever found in woman (rose geith)! it
was the thought of him that wrung her heart, and made her path so difficult to
travel. Because, if Mark once married and had children, there was an end of
George's chance for ever. He should not marry. She came round to that decision
once again, and was thinking how she might best be able to maintain it, when
the door was flung open, and a footman (lady geith's footman) entering with
lights, announced at the same moment, 
"Mr George Geith."

CHAPTER 11. AUNT AND NEPHEW. 

"George, this is unexpected."
"I am very glad to see you again, aunt;" and then they talked about the rain,
and the cold, and the season, as though they had been meeting every day for the
previous twelvemonth, till the servant (lady geith's footman) left the room and
closed the door behind him. 
When he had done so, the two looked at each other long and earnestly  looked
words that might never be spoken, inquiries which could never be uttered. 
How had the years been passed? What had they brought with them? What of joy,
what of sorrow, was clasped within the volume containing a large portion of a
life which now lay closed before them. Eight years had made the young man
middle-aged, the middle-aged woman old. Lady Geith's hair was grey, her face
longer, her figure less erect than when her nephew had seen her last; whilst,
as for George, the change in his appearance struck his aunt so forcibly that at
last she could refrain no longer, but broke the silence with  
"Where have you been? what have you been doing to yourself all these years?"
"Working  in London," he answered. 
"In London, and yet never came to see me. George, what was it made you leave
Morelands? What could induce you to keep us in ignorance of where you were? You
have caused me sleepless nights and wretched days," she went on; "could you not
have written even one word to say you were alive and well?"
"I ought to have written," was his reply; "but at first I thought it better to
break off all old connections, everything which could shake my resolution.
Afterwards, writing seemed useless. The last thing we learn is, to believe that
old friends, after years of absence, still think kindly of us."
"You ought never to have doubted me," said Lady Geith, her eyes filling with
tears. "If you had been my own son twenty times over, George, I could not have
suffered more anxiety on your account. I did not know what to do; I did not
know which way to turn. As I could not imagine why you had left Morelands, I
was afraid of taking any step that might compromise you. Advertising, private
inquiries, might all have led to-"
"To some other person finding out my whereabouts also," he finished, as she paused and hesitated. 
"Yes, nothing but fear, I felt satisfied, could have driven you from Morelands.
You had got into some scrape there, and, being too proud to let your friends
help you out of it, you fled. Was it not so, George? "
She asked this anxiously, and her nephew understood, in a moment, what she wanted him to tell her. 
"I had done nothing wrong, aunt," he replied, with a grave smile, which
reassured her; "I had done nothing wrong, either at Morelands or elsewhere; but
I was a fool once in my life, and the consequences of my folly pursued me there
and harassed me to such an extent that I was forced at last to adopt the course I did."
"But could money not have relieved you; could your friends  could I  have done
nothing in the matter?" asked Lady Geith. 
"Money might have done something, death has," he answered, drawing his breath
as he spoke, like a man who lays down a heavy burden which he has carried far and fast. 
"And you have nothing now to fear from any one?" 
"Nothing; a single grave is long enough and deep enough to hold what caused misery to me."
"You wish to tell me nothing more about your trouble?" she said, inquiringly. 
For a minute he was tempted to tell her the whole story; but he put the
temptation aside, remembering that confidence, even to the nearest and dearest,
usually proves an expensive luxury; and thinking of the old saying, which
affirms "that three people can keep a secret if two are away."
Not even for private circulation had George the slightest intention of printing
off his folly; for, if once he printed it at all, who could tell where chance
and accident and evil fortune might not bear the tell-tale sheets. He trusted
his aunt, certainly, but still it was better to trust no one, and so he answered  
"I would rather not tell you more about it. It is not pleasant to dig down into
the past only to bring up skeletons, and I am sure all you really want to be
certain about, is that I did no wrong, and that I am free."
"Thank God for it!" said Lady Geith, earnestly; "but, George, ' free' is a strong word to use."
"Not too strong, though," he replied; "a man does not leave his home, forsake
his profession, and cast himself adrift from all his relations without a
sufficient reason. There is a worse captivity than any prisoner can know within
four stone walls. I have felt it, and am competent to speak."
And was not she? As he finished, she bowed her head in her hands; for the echo
his words woke in her soul deafened her. Was not she? Good Heavens! what
prisoner ever endured a worse captivity? Could chains and bars, and bolts and
locks have ever bound her so fast as the consequences of her own sin had done? 
If George Geith had sinned likewise; had he confessed to any crime; had he told
a tale of temptation yielded to, of wrong committed, his aunt might then have
told her story to him, and flung herself at once on his sympathy, his
generosity, and his mercy. But to a man who declared he had been only sinned
against, how could a sinner speak? And so the opportunity drifted away down the
river of time, and the secret of each was still preserved intact. 
"Though you do not like talking about the past," said Lady Geith, after a
pause, "I suppose you have no objection to tell in your future plans. You will
return to the Church, I hope. Great Snareham is not yet vacant, certainly, but
there are other livings to be had, and - "
"I shall never re-enter the Church, aunt," he interrupted. "I left it
unwillingly; but I know now that I am not fit to be a clergyman; that as years
went on I should have wearied of the life, and become dissatisfied with my
position. Business is the only really productive field of labour for a poor and
pushing man. It is all very well to talk of family influence and good
connections. Would any influence have given me my present income, and still
left me my independence?"
"I do not know," she answered; "you have not told me what your income is, nor
the nature of the business in which you are engaged."
Then George Geith repeated the story which you, my readers, have heard before,
of his struggles and his success. Forgetting the weary drudgery, the
mortification, the long protracted suspense which make the earlier parts of a
business life so hard to pass through; forgetting all the prejudices of society
against trade, all old bugbears of gentility, ail the ideas in which he had
been born and bred up, and only feeling how great and grand a thing it is to
have fought the battle of poverty single handed, to have risen unaided and
unpatronized, George Geith grew eloquent, and told the tale of years gone by in
words that commanded the interest of his listener. 
Would to God (I the narrator) could make the details of business as interesting
to my readers. (I the narrator) would I could show to men of pleasure and to
men of rank what trade really is; what an excitement, what a pain, what a
struggle, and when honestly and honourably carried out, what a glory too. Every
other class has found some writer to tell its tale; but (I the narrator) can
remember no book which has ever described a shopkeeper as a man, or ventured
into that debateable middle land, where talent and energy are struggling from
morning to night in dingy offices, in dark warehouses, unknown in the world's
eye, solely because business has never yet learnt to be self-conscious; because
it is in its very nature to work rather than to think, to push forward to the
goal rather than to analyse the reasons which induce it to push forward at all.
And it is this which makes business uninteresting to outsiders. As a rule, a
tradesman cannot talk of himself. He speaks of markets, of failures, of losses,
of successes; but he cannot, or will not, reveal how these things affected his
own feelings and thoughts. The rich can make quite a volume of sentiment out of
the merest trifles. The poor are glib enough and pathetic enough concerning
their stomachs and a fall in wages. The woes of governesses are drugs in the
markets. The trials of sensitive men who cannot make sixpence a year, have been
repeated till even young ladies are weary of making heroes of them. Gold
diggers, emigrants, hunters, explorers, all find words with which to interest
the public ear. It is only trade, only that which is the back-bone of England,
only that which furnishes heiresses for younger sons; only that which sends
forth fleets of merchant men, and brings home the products of all countries;
only that which feeds the poor, and educates the middle classes, and keeps the
nobility of the land from sinking to the same low level as the nobility of all
other lands has done; it is only this, (I the narrator) say, which can find no
writer worthy of it, no one who does not jeer at business and treat with
contempt that which is holy in God's sight, because it is useful, and proves
beneficial to millions and millions of His creatures. 
George Geith, however, was not ashamed of the calling that brought him bread;
and his previous education, and the association of earlier years, furnished him
with words in which to state the story of the past seven years; how he had come
to London friendless, and had since gained a connection; how he had mastered
all the details of his business; how he had slaved as a clerk; how he had
struggled as a beginner on his own account; how he was now comparatively
well-to-do, an independent man, with every prospect of doing better and better
as the years rolled on; the first younger son of the Geiths who had ever before
bettered his condition save by marriage or inheritance. 
And Lady Geith listened. She who had wronged this man, listened and thanked
God; for she felt that, in the mysterious course of God's providence, good
would come out of evil, and that George Geith was a better and a happier man,
labouring in the City, which was a terra incognita, unto her, than he could
possibly be waiting for Arthur Geith's death; sighing away his life till his
uncle's shoes should drop from his cold feet, and come to be possessed by him. 
She had seen enough of what is called pleasure likewise to be aware its day is
not all sunshine, and to be dimly conscious that there is a something higher in
life than pleasure, namely, work; consequently she made no lament concerning
the disgrace which had fallen on the Geiths by one of them having soiled his
fingers by touching trade; nay, rather she told her nephew how proud she was of
him, and how she wished that such a son had been given unto her. 
Then came George's opportunity. "I think, aunt," he said, "you have every cause
to be proud of the son you possess. I do not know where you would find a
handsomer, or franker, or more generous fellow than Mark," and the accountant,
all unconscious of the stab he was giving, turned towards the woman who had
chosen a child at random to pass off as her own, and found, when it was too
late, she had chosen nothing strong, nor great, nor clever, but only a person
very like his most ordinary neighbours, of whom his best friend could find
little to say in his praise, save that he was "handsome, and frank, and generous."
What commendation! Why even a drivelling fool might have been so described
without any breach of truth. 
"You have seen him lately?" asked Lady Geith. 
"This morning," George answered. "I slept last night at Snareham Castle."
"And you come here from him? on his behalf I mean," added Lady Geith. 
"I come here, first, to see you," answered George, "and in the second place, to
talk about Mark. He is very unhappy, aunt. He stands in a most uncomfortable position."
"It was his own free choice getting into it," said Lady Geith, coldly. 
"That probably does not add to his comfort," replied her nephew, "and really in
the matter which is the principal cause of disagreement between you, I do not
think Mark much to blame. It is indeed rather to his credit to have chosen a
portionless girl (cissy). Would you not rather see him marry for love, than marry for money?"
"I would rather not see him marry at all," retorted her ladyship, with such
sharp suddenness that her tone struck George mute. "And what is more," she went
on, "if I can prevent it he shall not marry, either."
"Do you mean to say," asked her nephew, "that you want him to remain single all
his life, that you wish to see no wife at Snareham, no heir to all that fine estate?"
"I do," she answered, "wives have been the curses of the Geiths; and as for
sons, what son has ever succeeded his father in this most wretched family?"
"Mark," was George's reply to this question, and as he replied, Lady Geith rose
and walked up and down the room, pressing her hands to her temples the while. 
"True," she said at last, "and I wish he had never succeeded. I wish in this
case anyone, Arthur Geith, you, or even a stranger, were now at Snareham in his
stead. He would be happier working as you have done; he would be better without
his title, without his properties. What has been his life since he came into
possession? Who have been his companions; what his pursuits? Did he tell you
how he has wasted his substance; how he has gambled; how he has lost on horses;
how he has hampered himself with debts that he can never pay off in his
lifetime; and how, with as fine an estate as any of its class in England, he is
yet very little better than a beggar?"
"But, aunt, consider how he was brought up," urged George. "Was there anything
he wanted, his father (the late baronet) did not let him have? Was he ever
taught the value of money? Was he ever shown that property has its
responsibilities as well as its advantages? that a man, even if he be a
baronet, is scarcely free to do just what he likes with his own? I do not think
Mark is to blame for not practising what he never learnt."
"What I ought to have taught him, I suppose, you mean," remarked Lady Geith. 
"What someone ought, most certainly," answered her nephew, boldly. "His father
(the late baronet), at any rate. Mark has, however, now learnt dearly what
might have been taught him once cheaply; and it seems to me there is no use in
blaming him for past errors, if he be willing to reform in the future. Surely
marriage ought to make him more careful, for he would then have another's
interests to consider as well as his own."
"I have told you I will not have him marry," repeated Lady Geith. 
"You must pardon me, aunt, for saying that no human being has a right to
prevent a man marrying if he choose."
"Let him marry then," retorted Lady Geith. "Though I do not wish him to marry,
though I believe he will bring misery on himself if he do marry, I shall not prevent his doing so."
"But he cannot marry without your help," said the accountant. 
"Which I am not bound to give," was the lady's decided reply. 
"Then, virtually, you are determined that he shall never have wife, nor child,
nor home worthy the name," observed George, after a short silence. 
"He has determined that for himself by his own conduct," said Lady Geith, "by
his extravagance and by his folly. For a man in his position to fall in love
with a penniless girl is absurd."
"Then you would like him to marry for money," questioned George. 
"I should like him to face his affairs, to retrench, to rely on himself for
once. Do you know what his debts are, George?" she asked suddenly; "how much he
has to live on after paying life insurance, and interest, and so forth?"
"I have not the faintest idea," replied her nephew. 
"Something under fifteen hundred a year," she answered. "A fine income that on
which to marry and keep up Snareham and a town house. He wants me to help him
clear the property, but I cannot and will not do anything of the kind. It is un
reasonable to expect it. You see yourself I should be mad to risk my fortune in
such a way; for he would never continue to pay his life insurances were I his
creditor. He would only go and contract fresh debts, and live more extravagantly than ever."
She was certainly throwing new light on the subject. George's business head saw
at once what Mark could never have been made to comprehend, viz., that if Lady
Geith cleared Snareham with her own money, she would certainly want bread
before she died; and as he could urge no course upon her tending to such a
result, he broke new ground, and remarked  
"At any rate, aunt, you might receive Miss Hayles, and see what you think of her."
"To what purpose?" asked her ladyship, who had by this time resumed her seat
and her composure. "I should be raising false hopes, and giving my countenance
to a match which cannot take place. Mark must give up the girl."
"He has gone too far to be able to do anything of the kind," answered George, a
little impatiently. "And if you were to see Miss Hayles, I do not think you
would marvel at his choice."
"Were she as beautiful as Venus, and as fascinating as a syren, it could make
no difference to me," returned his aunt. "I shall not help Mark to entangle himself further."
"Still, aunt, if you will not see Miss Hayles, will you not be reconciled to
Mark? He is very unhappy about the unfortunate differences that have parted
you; he is very sorry for his conduct. For my sake, aunt, will you let him come
here and speak for himself. It is the first great request I have ever made to
you. Will you grant it?"
"Yes; if you will grant me one in return," said Lady Geith, after a moment's
pause; "if you will come to me for what money you may require in your business,
either as gift or loan, I shall not refuse to forgive Mark some sentences
which, however, I can never forget. Name what sum you like, one thousand or
ten, and you shall have it to-morrow before two o'clock."
My reader, my dear business reader, listen to this offer, and think what a
temptation it must have proved to George Geith; so insidiously proffered, too,
as loan or gift; as loan, which, if prosperous and proud, he could repay; as
gift, which, if he failed, need never trouble his memory more. Ten thousand
pounds! see you not at the words  warehouses stocked, ships freighted, shops
filled? Knowing what you have done with your poor little capital, with your
mere bagatelle of four or five hundred sovereigns, does not the bare idea of
this wealth bring visions of greatness before you? Multiplying, extending,
ramifying  what could you not do with ten thousand pounds? take that first-rate
place, the premium asked for which, and the long rent at the back of that, puts
it out of your power to do more than think of it now? 
You might take it, and advertise freely, and purchase largely, and employ
efficient clerks. Great Mammon! what might not you do with ten thousand pounds?
and here is a man who can refuse such an offer.
Not for the reason he assigns to Lady Geith, that he does not want it; not
because he is blind to the power money can give to even so apparently ready
cash a profession as that of an accountant; but simply because of an old, old
promise, made to one whose hand will never clasp his again, whose eyes may
never welcome him home more! 
Ease, competence, wealth, perhaps, as great as Mark's, he saw might be
compassed by means of the sum thus offered, but he refused gently and
gratefully, so gratefully that Lady Geith's heart was wrung. 
"You thank me now, George," she said, constrained to speak by an impulse she
could not control. "You thank me now, George. I wonder if the day will come
when you will curse me as the worst enemy you ever knew?"
"I shall never do that, aunt, rest assured," George replied. "Even though you
should prove my enemy in the future  though why you should, passes my
comprehension  I shall not forget your kindnesses in the past. But now about
Mark," he added; "you will see him; I may write, and tell him I have mediated
successfully, so far."
"Yes, I will see him," she said it wearily; "understand me clearly, though,
George, and make him understand me too. I will see Mark, but I will not assist
him; I will not commit an injustice towards another for the sake of helping a
man who cannot help himself."
"If you are thinking of me," answered George, who had been waiting to get in
this protest all through the interview, "I can only say I have no right nor
title to expect anything from you, and that if you made over the whole of your
fortune to me tomorrow, I should not touch a penny of it."
"Yes, George, you would," she said, laying her hand on his arm: "for if I left
my money to you I should leave you likewise my reasons for doing so, and in
that case your promise to your mother (rose geith) would bind you no longer;
for even she would not have objected to your taking atonement from a sinner after confession." 
Now what could a man say to such a speech as this, more especially such a man
as George Geith? Nothing; and accordingly that was what he did say, pressing
her hand at the same time in token of farewell.
"So you will not stay for dinner; you are weary of old friends already, and
want to run away?" she pleaded. 
"I will come some other time," he answered, "when Mark is here, if you give me
leave to do so;" and with that promise he departed, and wended his way from the
west to the east  from Piccadilly, gay with lights and carriages, to the
darkness of Fen Court, where the trees kept sobbing and moaning over the graves. 
CHAPTER 12. OFFICE VISITORS. 

The months went by, spring succeeded to winter, summer to spring, and still
George Geith was in Fen Court, doing well. 
Save increase of business, time had brought no changes to him worth
chronicling. At intervals he had visited his aunt (lady geith), at intervals
likewise he had seen Mark, between whom and his mother a fresh disagreement had
arisen soon after Easter, which accelerated Lady Geith's departure for the
continent, and caused Sir Mark's final retirement to Snareham Castle, to fell
his timber and think over his debts. 
The accountant had done some business for his cousin during the winter; showed
him clearly how he stood, and how, by changing his mortgagees, he might effect
a considerable annual saving in interest, which, as George wisely remarked,
"might be devoted to paying off the principal." In fact, what with the timber
which the property could well spare, savings in interest and strict economy in
personal expenditure, the accountant considered that the estate might be
completely cleared in ten years, and in this view the baronet had at one time
cordially agreed. But after the second disagreement with his mother, Sir Mark's
tone changed. Despairing of help from her, the prospect of ten years of economy
frightened this spoiled child of fortune. 
"I should not care for work," he said. "Hang it! George, take me into
partnership and let me make enough to clear off this d  d mortgage. Five or six
thousand pounds ought to turn in thirty thousand in no time."
But George shook his head. He knew well enough where a business would soon be,
that Mark Geith had any say to. 
"Well, use five or six thousand, and give me half profits," said the baronet,
who was very much in earnest about the matter. 
"There is such a thing in business as losing as well as using," observed his cousin. 
"Let us try, at any rate. I should not care about losing," persisted Sir Mark. 
"But I should," answered George; and as he said this, his mind travelled back
over years and years, over the difficulties he had vanquished, the weary
lessons he had conned, the hills he had climbed, the long, long road he had
traversed solitary and unaided. Given, two men talking on any subject, and how
hard, my reader, it is for the one to imagine what mental picture the
conversation presents for the contemplation of the other. 
What is it that the eyes, turning towards the past, behold? what is it that the
speaker is really thinking about, whilst he talks glibly enough of the matter
in hand? His fellow may never know that; for the great dramas of life are acted
out by every man and woman among us, with no spectator but One above. In its
sin, in its sorrow, in its despair, in its misery, its patient endurance, and
its frantic struggle, humanity is lonely beyond all power of expression. 
Where the thorns have entered, where the brambles have torn, where the path has
been roughest, where the purpose has faltered, where tears of bitterness have
been shed, where hands have been clasped most tenderly, where words of farewell
have been spoken, where the poor tired pilgrim has lain down in mortal agony,
and sobbed out his despair, who may tell but God? 
And if you could only believe this, my reader; if you could only feel that the
most commonplace man you meet has acted out in his own way some tragedy, on
which his Maker and yours has looked with interest, (I the narrator) think it
would make you more patient towards those who are neither clever nor
attractive; more tolerant to all sorts and conditions of men; more pitiful to
those who may, for aught you know, have suffered more than the Almighty will
ever permit you to suffer; and more indulgent towards those writers who choose
their heroes from amongst the men who pass you by in the street, who crowd
railway stations, who live plainly and have no story to tell about themselves,
though they may have fought battles, and faced dangers, and passed through
troubles, that have made them strong in the sight of God. 
Weary and long was the road George Geith had travelled in order to reach
comparative success. Looking back, he could not but shudder at the light way in
which Mark spoke of losing a game which was bread, and meat, and clothing to
himself. If Sir Mark had known anything of work, anything of business, loss and
success would not have seemed a mere game of pitch-toss with fortune. 
The more money he made, the larger his connection grew; the higher the stake he
was playing for, the more cautious George Geith became in business, the more
earnestly he buckled to his work; and he would just as soon have thought of
intrusting the management of his affairs to a lunatic, as of suffering his
cousin to have any voice in the disposal of his profits, any finger in the
business-pie. He knew, if he did, Sir Mark would soon have out all the plums;
and for this reason, if for no other, he resolutely declined all the baronet's
proposals; which, though at first made jestingly, came in the end to be spoken
in serious earnest by the younger man. 
The natural result followed, and by degrees Sir Mark forgot his way to Fen
Court, and forgot likewise to ask his cousin so frequently to Snareham. 
"I think I know what he is doing," said the accountant, looking out on the
trees before his window, which were now green and leafy with the early summer
foliage; "I know what he is doing; he is cutting off the entail."
And the accountant was right. Sir Mark Geith was cutting off the entail, and
George could not raise a finger to prevent him. 
Thus the man who dwelt in the City, and who laboured there, found himself, for
the second time in his life, quite alone. But as it is one thing for a person
to leave his friends, and quite another for his friends to leave him, George
Geith felt more lonely now than he had done in the days when he was Gregory
Grant, struggling for liberty, struggling for bread. 
He saw that he might live the life of dependence and pleasure, or the life of
independence and business; but that he could not combine business and pleasure,
and in a dim kind of way he began to understand what puzzles most people till
they have dwelt in the Castle of Indolence, and scrambled for daily bread in
the hard fields of labour; namely, why so broad a line of demarcation separates
the two classes; why pleasure cannot away with business, and why business scowls at pleasure. 
Now socially came the time of trial for this busy man; now with Snareham fading
from his view, with the old doors closed against him, came an hour when George
Geith asked himself whether  seeing man cannot for ever live alone  he had not
better make the best of his business connection, and seek his future
acquaintances amongst those who were travelling the same road as himself. 
If the one land held no welcome for him, why should he not turn his face to the
other? He had chosen: he was of business  busy. Let him greet those whose
leisure moments were rare also! He was of the City  cityish. Why should he not
make friends of those who passed their days under the shadow of the dragon and
the grasshopper: and swear allegiance to the mag nates of Cockaigne? 
Here was a point where cross roads met; along which would he turn? Should he
take business for his end; Mammon for his god; a wife with a little money, and
a great deal of vulgarity, for his helpmate, and her connections for his for
evermore? Or should he use business as a means, worship Mammon, but moderately,
and either live single all his life long, or wait for such a wife as he would
have chosen in the old days gone by? 
Which should he select: a life with something in it beside the City and the
Three per Cents, or an existence like that of hundreds of business men, who are
sufficiently well off to be uninteresting, and so thoroughly content and
self-satisfied that the most daring of authors would never venture to put them in a book?
Would he turn at this point, or go on straight as hitherto which? We shall see. 
Had the men he met been the same at home as they were in their offices; had the
women who were wives and daughters to the City folks, with whom he was brought
in contact, been anything like as presentable as their husbands and brothers,
George Geith might have rested where he was for ever; but as it was, so it was.
Every prejudice, every taste, every feeling of the man rose up in revolt
against the manners and habits of the people, who asked him to come and be one
with them; and he drew himself further back into his shell, refusing to be
lured forth by such wiles as theirs. He would not run down to Brighton from
Saturday till Monday. He could not spare time to visit Hastings; he dined once
or twice at suburban houses, where the material silver was very good, but where
the manners of his hosts and hostesses (george's london friends) were only very
lightly plated with social electrotype. He was very shy of the Bemmidges'
hospitality, and cleverly fenced off Mrs Bemmidge's invitations for him to join
their party to the theatre, or the opera, and to the Zoological Gardens. She
had got some tickets from a shareholder for Sunday admission, and she wanted Mr
Geith to hear the band; but Mr Geith declined. He was engaged for the day, he
said, and so he was. At St Helen's church in the morning, and in Fen Court and
on the Tower Wharf in the afternoon. 
It was a mighty lonely existence, and there are few who would not have sunk in
its waters to something worse. 
There was one habit Mrs Bemmidge had contracted, since that unhappy Christmas
dinner, which the accountant could not endure, viz., that of coming to his
office to press her invitations in person. 
She had him at a disadvantage there. She was a woman, and he could not ask her
to go out; and very often it was evident she would not go until she carried her
point. Moreover, she could answer his objections and bear down his excuses.
Altogether it was a proceeding George detested. Had she come on business, with
a set of books to balance, an estate to be wound up, a schedule to be prepared,
or even her housekeeping bills to be examined and added up, George would have
forgiven her; but to bring her petticoats, and not only her own petticoats, but
those of her mother (mrs gilling) and sister (miss gilling), into his office,
to scatter his papers, to ask to sit down, if he was out; to take possession of
his chairs, and walk up and down that sacred inner office, as though the fact
of her sex gave her title deeds of his possessions  the practice was
unendurable, objectionable in the extreme. 
In the first place, it was very inconvenient; in the second, it did not look
well; and George Geith thought a man in business ought to be more careful about
appearances than even Csar's wife. 
Under the infliction he chafed, and, though he had been a clergyman, swore:
"What the deuce does the woman mean by it!" he thought. "I wonder Bemmidge
allows her. If I were married, I would not suffer my wife to enter my office,
let alone go into any other man's. It is not only a confounded nuisance, but it is also improper."
Which very likely it seemed to him, though it did not to the lady (mrs
bemmidge), who was only, in her own eyes, doing her duty both by Mr Geith and
her sister (miss gilling). She wanted to get the one settled, and the other out
into a little pleasant society; and, as Mr Geith would not come to the
mountain, why, there was nothing for it but for the mountain to go to him. 
Wherefore she often penetrated to Fen Court, and many and many a time compelled
him to accept her invitations in order to get rid of her. Had the accountant
been a weak man, he would have married Gertrude to get rid of the family; but
he was strong and not over sensitive, for which reasons he finally gave orders
to Mr Foss always to tell Mrs Bemmidge he was engaged. 
"No matter what I am doing, I shall be busy the whole day; and if I am out, you
don't expect me in at all, remember."
"Yes, sir. And Mr Bemmidge?"
"I shall see him, unless Mrs Bemmidge or Miss Gilling be with him; but I
cannot, and will not, be pestered with women, unless they come on business."
"Pestered with women," that was the way this man spoke of the sex for which Mr
Foss had an unbounded reverence. If he had had an office, and Miss Gilling had
come there with a friend, what would he not have done for her? 
He would have let business go to the dogs; he would have stirred the fire in
the winter; opened the window in summer; gone away with her for the afternoon;
accepted her sister's invitations with rapture. 
As it was, he could but obey the instructions of his principal in the office,
and, in the course of a walk towards Crouch End, with Miss Gilling, suffer that
young lady to pump the order he had received, out of him. Afterwards Mr Foss
could have bitten a piece off his tongue for the indiscretion, but that would
have done no good; and Miss Gilling was so kind as to take no notice of his words. 
But she stored the grievance up, and nursed what she considered the insult
offered to her, even while she still went to Fen Court with her sister (mrs
bemmidge), and took chance of finding Mr Geith at home.
He was at home, and busy, one summer's afternoon when Mrs Bemmidge tapped at
his door. His clerks were both out, the one at the West (simmons) and the other
at the Bank (mr foss), so that he had to answer the summons himself, after
which there was, of course, no retreat. 
"So we have caught you at last," said Mrs Bemmidge, as she sailed into the room
in all the glory of a figured peach barege, a light shawl, and a pink bonnet.
Miss Gilling, cool and bewitching, in a straw bonnet trimmed with
primrose-coloured riband, a black scarf, and a blue muslin dress. Mamma's queen
accompanied the pair, perhaps as a duenna, and at once took off her head-gear,
to Mr Geith's intense dismay. 
"Oh! ma, ain't it 'ot in here?" said the sweet child; and hot it certainly was,
with not a window open, and the sun shining with all its might against the glass. 
"It is very warm," acquiesced mamma (mrs bemmidge); and she sat down and fanned
herself with The Times newspaper. 
"I cannot offer to open the windows," remarked Mr Geith with a grim feeling of
satisfaction, "for there is a breeze, and the letters get blown about in all directions."
"I am sure it is no wonder you are ill," said Mrs Bemmidge, "sitting writing in
this close room from morning till night."
"You are very kind, but I am not ill," answered George, who was leaning against his desk. 
"It is of no use your telling me that," observed Mrs Bemmidge, as though she
were gifted with some special power of divination; "anyone can tell you are ill
by looking in your face. I declare I should scarcely know you since last
Christmas; you will have a serious illness, (generic mark) my words, Mr Geith,
if you are so careless of your health; Mr Bemmidge has been quite unhappy about
you lately. He says you are killing yourself by inches.  It was only last night
he was lamenting you would not go out of town. Was not it, Gertrude?"
Miss Gilling confirmed her sister (mrs bemmidge)'s statement. It was a
peculiarity of this pair, as it seems to be of many, that the one never
appeared to think her statement would be credited unless the other swore to its truth. 
"My brother-in-law," said Miss Gilling, modestly, "talks about you every night."
"I am extremely obliged to Mr Bemmidge," said George, thinking at the same time
how short that gentleman must be of interesting subjects of conversation. 
"And he was saying," went on Mrs Bemmidge, "that if you would come and stop
with us for a week or two the change of air might do you good. We are almost in
the country; and at any rate it would be better for you than this hot, stifling oven."
Having finished which neat little speech, Mrs Bemmidge laid down The Times and
untied her bonnet-strings. 
"You really are too kind," answered the accountant; "I am not worth all the
trouble you take in my behalf; and besides," he added, "I really am not ill. I
am perfectly well, and the heat of this place does not affect me as it seems to
do you; on the contrary, I am perfectly cool and comfortable;" and Mr Geith,
standing in the full glare of the afternoon sun, made this statement with
self-possession and composure. 
"Well, if you are cool here," said Mrs Bemmidge, "I do not think you would be
too warm in Calcutta."
"I do not think I should," replied George, and he laughed as he said it. 
"But whether you feel the closeness of this place or not," persisted Mrs
Bemmidge, "it must affect your health. What with the smoke, and the heat, and
the want of ventilation"
"Pray be just, Mrs Bemmidge," interrupted George, "there is Billiter Square on
the east, the churchyard on the west. Two lungs, two large, open spaces; what more would you have?"
"A churchyard, poison!" exclaimed Mrs Bemmidge. "Breathing one's father and
mother, as Mr Bemmidge says."
"I believe," observed Mr Geith, mildly, "that Fen church-yard was closed before
my father (adolphus geith) and mother (rose geith) were in existence."
"Really, Mr Geith, you are as hard to persuade as  as  "
"As men are generally," he supplied. 
"As a woman, papa (mr bemmidge) tells mamma (mrs bemmidge)," broke in Mrs
Bemmidge's queen (Amy Bemmidge), who had been amusing herself with sketching a
house on the back of a carefully-prepared balance-sheet, and drew by her
remark, attention to her employment. 
"Gracious, child! what have you done?" exclaimed Mrs Bemmidge, as George
snatched the paper from before her, and placed it on his desk, with an
expression on his face which was not pleasant. "I hope she has done no harm. I
declare, miss, you shall never come out with me again. You naughty girl! how
many times am I to tell you never to touch anything without permission?" and
therewith, full of virtuous indignation, mamma, regardless alike of loosened
bonnet and unfastened shawl, arose and shook her queen, who lifted up her voice and wept. 
"Oh! for Heaven's sake, Mrs Bemmidge, don't let her cry here," entreated the
accountant. "Do be quiet, child, there is someone coming up the stairs." To
George's great relief it was only the (fen court postman), but the incident
decided him to get rid of Mrs Bemmidge at any cost. To have a child (amy
bemmidge) (a devil he mentally called it) shrieking in his office, to have
punishment, however necessary and satisfactory, inflicted in his own private
sanctum within earshot of all the other men who carried on business in the
house  the thing was unendurable; and if quiet was only to be purchased by more
frequent visits to Ivy Cottage, why to Ivy Cottage he would go. Short of
insulting Mr Bemmidge and quarrelling with the whole connection, the accountant
saw no other way out of the maze he had unhappily got into  and quarrelling was
against his creed. He never knew where an enemy might do him harm, nor when a
friend might benefit him. 
By this time Mrs Bemmidge had readjusted her bonnet, and, with Miss Gilling's
help, got on her shawl; she had also recovered sufficient breath to apologize
to Mr Geith for Amy's misdeeds, and to hope the mischief she had done was not irreparable.
"I shall have to copy it out again, but that will not take very long," said the
accountant, somewhat ruefully. "The child did not know she was doing any harm,
so I hope you will say no more to her about it."
"I trust she will be grateful for your kindness, and prove it by behaving
better another time." Mr Geith groaned inwardly. "I am sure I am obliged to you
for taking it so well. And now will you not come to us? You shall have
breakfast whatever hour you like in the morning; you shall come and go as you
choose; Mr Bemmidge will be delighted, and I really think the change of air
would be of immense benefit to you."
"I am sorry to say, Mrs Bemmidge, it is impossible," answered George; "I have
to work here sometimes up to two and three o'clock in the morning; I never can
tell from one day to another how much leisure I shall have, or whether I shall
have any. I cannot go to stay with you; but if you will allow me to take tea
with you some evening  "
"Allow you!" broke in Mrs Bemmidge, "when you know we shall be only too glad to
see you. But some evening is no evening. When will you come, Mr Geith?"
"I think I can spend an hour or two to-morrow," he answered; "if anything
prevents my going, I will call round in Nicholas Lane."
"But you will not let anything prevent you; you will come if you can?"
"I will indeed, thank you," and George bowed the trio out, and then, inwardly
fuming, returned to his desk. Though he had told Mrs Bemmidge he was cool, the
heat of his room almost suffocated him, and so, after lifting the letter just
brought in, he retired into his back office, where, flinging down the window
and leaning out to drink the cool breeze, as a thirsty man might water, he read
the following epistle, which, though proceeding ostensibly from Mr Molozane,
was written by a lady (beryl molozane):
"Dower House, Molozane Park, 
Withefell, near Wattisbridge, 
June 25, 1848. 
"Dear Sir, Long and severe illness has prevented my seeing you since my return from Cornwall. 
"I now write to say that the affairs of the Sythlow Mining Co. have assumed
such an aspect as to necessitate immediate attention to my own. As you
anticipated, I find I shall require help in their arrangement, and I should
therefore feel obliged if you would come down here at your earliest
convenience, the state of my health rendering it impossible for me to visit
London for the present. As we are seven miles from a station, I must beg you to
name a day and train most suitable to yourself, and I will have a conveyance to
meet you at the St Margaret's station on the Eastern Counties line.  I am, dear
Sir, yours very truly,
 A. A. Molozane."
George Geith read this letter through twice, then, still leaning out of the
window, he thought over his engagements for the week, and concluded that if he
were to go to Wattisbridge at all, he could not choose a better day than the
morrow. If he did go, he should get rid of Mrs Bemmidge's invitation; get rid
at once of her and Miss Gilling and the children (bemmidge children), baby
(baby bemmidge) included, whom he detested. Moreover, he would probably have a
fine day for his journey, and he should get a glimpse of the country, and
breathe perfectly pure air, not City, not suburban, but perfectly pure, sweet
air among fields in which the mowers were busy. He would go; and, having
arrived at this decision, Mr Geith returned to his desk, where, after first
duly consulting Bradshaw, he wrote to Mr Molozane informing him that he would,
next day, be at St Margaret's by the train which was due at 2.55. 
He then finished his other letters, and, when his clerk (simmons) returned, put
on his hat and went down to Nicholas Lane to tell Mr Bemmidge he was
unexpectedly called out of town, and should consequently be unable to fulfil
his engagement for the following evening. 
"I am glad you are going out of town, even though we shall not see you," said
Andrew Bemmidge, as he shook the accountant's hand. "What part of the world are you bound for?"
"Hertfordshire," was Mr Geith's wide answer. 
"Ah! a sweet country, more particularly about Watford and Bushy; hope you will enjoy yourself."
"I am going on business," said George, "and there is never much enjoyment to be had out of that."
"Faith, I don't know," answered Mr Bemmidge; "one would think you must find
some fun in business, or you would not stick so close to it."
"I am sticking close now, that I may rest hereafter," was the reply. 
"That's all stuff," said the wine merchant. "I dare say you think at present
you will rest in the future, but I know better; I know men like you work, work,
work, till they die or go mad."
"Delightful prospect," observed the accountant; and as he walked away he
thought how little Mr Bemmidge really knew about him. Rather, however, was it
not George Geith who knew nothing really about himself; in time as well as in
eternity is it not true that what men are, that they remain? Are not the lazy,
lazy still  the untruthful, liars always; and does not the man who works hard
at thirty generally continue to work so long as his arm retains its strength,
and his right hand her cunning?

CHAPTER 13. IN THE COUNTRY.

Leaving the train at St Margaret's, Mr Geith looked round for the conveyance Mr
Molozane had mentioned would be awaiting his arrival; but as there was nothing
of the kind to be seen  not even a light cart  the accountant concluded either
that his letter had miscarried, or that his notice was too short to enable the
fortunate holder of shares in the Sythlow Mining Co. to fulfil his promise. 
Assuredly there was no vehicle of any sort waiting to convey him to Molozane
Park, and accordingly the accountant had to decide which of three courses to
pursue, viz., whether he should return to town, wait at St Margaret's till
someone appeared on behalf of Mr Molozane, or proceed to his destination as best he might. 
"It is seven miles to Withefell, is it not?" he asked of a porter (withefell
porter) when he had satisfied himself there was no one to meet him. 
"A good seven miles, sir, by the road to ride; but if you mean to walk, there
is a footpath turns off to the right after you get through Wattisbridge, which
cuts off a corner, and makes the distance not more than four or four and a half miles."
"What is Wattisbridge  a town?"
"No, sir, only a bit of a village, with a few houses round the green, and a
tavern and two or three shops."
"And Withefell?"
"Withefell is nothing but a row of small cottages. If it was not for the Hall,
there would be no Withefell at all."
"What hall do you mean?"
"Withefell Hall, sir, where Lord Austin used to live. It's a Mr Finch has it
now. It lay vacant for many and many a year. I can remember it well, for I was
born and brought up at Wattisbridge."
"Do you know Molozane Park?" asked Mr Geith. 
"Yes, it is on the other side of Withefell, a full half mile beyond it; Mr
Werne lives there. He will be out by the next train."
"I thought Mr Molozane lived at the Park?"
"No, sir  not now. He has left it this three years, I suppose. He's gone to the
Dower House, as it is called, which stands on the side of the property nearest
Withefell. The Park belongs to Mr Molozane, and Mr Werne rents it of him."
"And is the path you mentioned my nearest way to the Dower House?"
"Yes, sir, keep straight on for about a mile till you come to a road to your
left hand, which takes you through the wood over Hertford Heath. Then go across
the common, and never turn till you get to Wattisbridge. If you take the first
field path to your right after you get through Wattisbridge, it will bring you
out nearly opposite Mr Molozane's."
"Is there any hotel at Wattisbridge  any place I could stay at for the night,
if I cannot get back here?"
"There is a very good tavern, sir, the 'Stag.' It is not exactly an hotel, but
it is a very good wayside inn. Mr Elsenham stops there when he is not at the
Dower House; and his groom and horses always stay at the ' Stag.'"
"And who may Mr Elsenham be?" asked George. 
"Mr Molozane's nephew. He is down here six months out of the twelve. Should you
like your bag sent over to Wattisbridge, sir. I can get it taken if you please."
Of course George pleased. He was only too glad to be rid of it, and accordingly
after duly feeing the porter (withefell porter), both for his information and
his services, he started in the full blaze of the afternoon sun, on his way to
Withefell. Over the little hill, due west, he went, and then along a road
bordered by limes and elms and nut-trees, between which he caught glimpses of a
country fair and rich, and undulating. It was so hot that a purple mist seemed
to enfold the distant parts of the landscape. There was a strange calm in
everything round and about him. No breeze stirred among the trees, the birds
were not singing, the cattle were lying in shady corners of the fields. The
mowers seemed to have finished their work, for the grass was down, and the hay
in ricks. The dust lay thick on the roads, but there was no wind to stir it.
Scarcely a vehicle passed by George Geith, as he wended his way along. He could
not walk fast, the heat was too intense for that, but as he paced slowly on his
way, looking at the country through which he passed, he felt it a very blessed
thing to get out of London even for a few hours, to be greeted and caressed and
kissed by nature, who was decked out in such glorious apparel, to receive her
prodigal. He had not been so far out of town in the summer-time for years; he
had almost forgotten what the country was like in summer, till he came to see
it now with its hedgerows festooned with roses, its trailing brambles twined
with honeysuckle; its banks softly cushioned with moss; its fields stretching
far away into the distance, whilst high above all was the calm blue sky, over
which floated a few light fleecy clouds. 
Dwellers in the country do not know how the sight thereof affects those who
dwell in towns. They who have the turf and the fields and the trees and the
flowers always, cannot imagine what sharpened senses gaze every now and then on
Nature, bask in her loveliness, drink in her perfumes, hearken to her music. 
To many a citizen, to look on the country in summer is to come fresh on a new
creation. The blades of grass, the hyacinths growing in the woods, the long
shadows of the trees lying on the turf beneath, the call of the blackbird, the
song of the thrush, the babbling of tiny brooks, the pebbles at the bottom of
some clear rivulet, the white roads winding off to distant villages and
hamlets; these things, which, it may be, the countryman never notices, because
he is amongst them always, are, to the dweller in towns, so marvellously
beautiful, so unutterably soothing, that he cannot tell his neighbour how they
affect him, for even very shallow people sometimes dare not talk about what
touches them most; and how that summer landscape touched George Geith, (I the
narrator) could scarcely, my reader, be able to explain. 
(I the narrator) only know that all that was noble and good and pure in the
man's hard nature was brought out by the sight of the country, and the trees,
and the grass; never to speak of the stillness, a stillness which he
occasionally stopped to hear, if the paradox may be allowed. On he went, on
past field and copse and hedgerow, on through the wood and across the common,
till at last he came to Wattisbridge, a thoroughly old-fashioned village, where
the "Stag "hung out its sign under the shadow of two glorious chestnuts, and
large red brick houses were scattered round the green. 
Away to the left lay the parish church, its square tower showing grey and
massive against the trees in the graveyard. Over the gate George leant for a
minute, looking at the diamond-paned windows, and the ancient porch, and the
headstones, some white, some moss-grown, on which the summer sun was shining. 
Many a year the accountant lived over again as he leant on the gate and looked
on the graves before him. Many a memory he had thought dead and buried, too,
arose from its coffin and stared him in the face. Pictures of the past came
crowding into his mind, filling his mental gallery full to overflowing. He saw
another church, another graveyard, the faces of the loved and lost, the hopes
and the sorrows, of many and many a day departed. He, almost another man as it
seemed to him, looked back on what he had been, and conjugated again by the
light of memory "to suffer," the only verb he had ever learnt thoroughly. He
looked back, another man as (I the narrator) have said, on the being and doing
and suffering of his former self; looked back, as such men do, calmly and
dispassionately at the trials of that other George Geith whom he had once been. 
There was no self-pity, no regret, no pain, but there was recollection, such
recollection as will come every now and then even to the hearts of men who work
hard and think little. 
And with olden memories still overlying the realities of his present existence,
he turned aside from the churchyard and pursued his way to Withefell. 
If he enjoyed the first portion of his walk, the latter proved more enjoyable
still. He was by this time in the field path which led straight away from
Wattisbridge to the Dower House. He trod on the cool grass; he passed close by
flocks of sheep; he stood to watch the lambs, who, all tails and legs, scudded
away to their mothers at his approach. He passed by shaded ponds where the
cattle stood knee-deep in the cool waters. He rested on this stile and on that,
and looked down into the hollows where young plantations were springing up, or
off to the far horizon where the purple haze lay heavy on the dark green trees. 
He had come from a place where, as (I the narrator) have before said, time
flies; where it is express pace year after year; where we may, indeed, travel
the miles of our three-score year and ten pilgrim age, but where those miles
seem short and unsatisfactory, because of the pace at which we go. We look at
something in the present, and behold, before we can look again, the past has
seized it. We throw down the sovereigns that make up the sum of our lives to
Time, and as he gathers them, he gives us scanty change for the treasures east
away. While the train by which we travel sweeps through life, quiet country
nooks, or world-forgotten stations, meet our aching eyes, and we feel it would
be pleasant to break the journey at some of them, and rest awhile, before
proceeding further towards that mighty terminus where the black coach is
waiting our arrival, to bear us into the "silent land." 
Great stretches of upland, woods lying still and green in the summer's soft
evening light, grey mountains reflected from the winter's sky, rivers with
mossy banks overshadowed by ancient trees, moors covered with the purple
heather, quiet streams rippling lazily against rock and stone, sheltered bays
where the waves steal slowly and gently up on the sand  these are the places
where our lost hours have taken up their abode. 
Backward and forward they flit softly over the upland, in the depths of the
woods they are lying asleep, they climb the sides of the great mountains, and
rest under the crags; they look into the darksome pools, lurk in the
blue-bells, rest among the heather; they are dreaming by the sides of the
streams, and looking with half-closed eyes out on the calm summer sea. If we
want them, if we would recover the moments, and the days, and the years stolen
from out our lives, it is in these places we must seek them. 
The two hours George Geith had taken for his leisurely walk, would have passed
in town almost without his noticing their flight; but in the country it seemed
to him as though he had lived a little life on the road between St Margaret's and Withefell. 
He was near the end of his journey now. He was crossing the last field which
separated him from the plantations of Molozane Park. At the end of the field
was a stile, and beyond that a short path, led through the wood, to the highway beyond. 
Before he left the field, George turned to look back on the way he had come. He
stood on a slight rising ground, and was able to see over miles of country.
Here a house, there a farmyard; gently sloping hills crowned with clumps of
trees. To the east and south he gazed for a few minutes, like a man looking his
last on something he might never see with the same feelings more, and then he
pursued his way towards the northwest, whither he was bound. 
As he neared the stile, he perceived on the other side of it a group, which he
stopped to contemplate. Since he left Wattisbridge he had met no person except
an old shepherd; and the little picture which was now on view at the entrance
of the wood, had therefore all the charm of novelty for him. 
Through the trees the afternoon sun shone brightly on the turf; down a grassy
glade his path lay straight, a path shaded by branches that wound their arms
together to make the great cathedral arch, from whence all other cathedral
arches have been copied; whilst for foreground, George's picture had a young
girl (Beryl), a black retriever, and a white poodle. 
The girl (beryl) occupied the lowest step of the stile, the retriever sat on
his haunches beside her, gravely watching the performances of the (white
poodle), which was standing on its hind legs, and balancing a piece of biscuit
on its pink nose. So deeply interested did the trio appear in the
last-mentioned feat, that George had time to notice the flow of the lady's
dress; the cool-looking plain check ribands with which her bonnet was trimmed,
a slit in her parasol, the very colour of the hair which peeped from beneath
her bonnet curtain, before his own approach was observed. 
"You may have it now," said the girl (Beryl), at last, and thereupon the (white
poodle) threw the piece up in the air, caught it, came down to earth, ate his
reward, and took up his position on his hind legs once more. 
"All done," observed his mistress, and she swept the crumbs off her dress on
the ground. "Why, what is the matter, (Royal the dog)? "and, looking round to
see what the dog was growling at, she beheld Mr Geith standing on the other
side of the stile, looking at her. 
Brown eyes, a blushing face, a hand laid on the dog's head, a smile which
would, but for the fact of his being an utter stranger, have been a laugh, a
sweet, young, fresh voice saying  
"I am afraid we have been in your way. (Royal the dog) will not bite."
That was all. He had seen, he had heard, he had raised his hat, he had passed,
and left the group behind. 
As he walked down the glade, thinking how much better girls look in the country
than in town, how much space in which to see a picture adds to its effect, how
much more noticeable that pretty creature he had just disturbed was surrounded
by trees and fields, than many another far prettier young lady he had seen in
London  the notion never entered George Geith's mind that that stile, that girl
(Beryl), that grave retriever, that ridiculous (white poodle)  had been
photographed for his benefit, and that through all the years to come, let them
be long, let them be short, that little scene at the entrance of the wood would
remain stamped on his mind indelibly. The thought never entered into his head
then, that, after many days, he should look at that picture through a mist of
tears; that with dim eyes he should see the glory of that summer sun flickering
before him; that his heart would ache at the thought of that day as it had
never ached before; that all hardness should die out of his nature when memory
brought back that upturned face, and that before the great misery of his future
he should lie down like a coward refusing to battle more. 
Ah, me! hard though George Geith might be, unpitying as he was, (I the
narrator) know that could he have foreseen what the future held for him and for
(Beryl), he would have turned on his path, and, leaving the woods and the
fields and the sweet country air, have gone back to his City drudgery again like a Spartan. 
He would have taken the sunshine out of his own life to save the clouds from
darkening down on hers. He would have left the dear face to smile on still, the
guileless heart to throb calmly. He would have left his day without a noon to
prevent night closing over hers. He would have known it was possible for him to
love so well that he should become unselfish; and for her sake, for the sake of
the girl he had seen only for a moment (Beryl), he would have opened the volume
of his life and written "Blank "across every page to come. 
But as it was, so it was; and all unconscious of what the future was holding
for him, George Geith walked along the path, through the glade, under the
shadow of arching trees, straight as he could go to meet his destiny. 
CHAPTER 14. NEW ACQUAINTANCES. 

When George Geith reached the end of the path he looked back, as was, perhaps,
only natural; but the girl (beryl) and her companions (royal the dog) (guess the dog) were gone.  
Once he got into the high road, however, he saw mistress (Beryl) and dogs
behind him, the former walking beside a lady on horseback (Matilda Molozane),
the latter demurely pacing through the dust. 
Not being perfectly sure as to whether a certain red brick mansion, which he
saw before him in the distance, might be the Dower House or not, the accountant
walked slowly on, so slowly that horse and rider (Matilda Molozane), and
flowing muslin dress and canine attendants, (royal the dog) (guess the dog) all
passed him before he was half-way to the entrance gates. 
As she walked by, the younger of the two ladies (beryl) glanced towards him
with a look of semi-recognition, whilst the retriever was so obliging as to
turn his head and look solemnly in the stranger's face. Somewhat ungratefully,
George bestowed his attention on neither; but fixed it on the equestrian
(matilda), who was undeniably handsome, and graceful to boot. She rode a
beautiful horse (Zillah), a creature which seemed so proud of itself, and of
her, that it scarcely knew what to do for very vanity. 
It arched its neck, it seemed dancing as it walked, it touched the ground
daintily with its hoofs, as though afraid of soiling them. Its tail was not
still for one second, and it champed at the bits and looked down, as if it were
contemplating its chest, and thinking how smooth and bright and glossy was its skin. 
As for the rider, George had never seen so beautiful a woman (Matilda
Molozane); dark hair, dark eyes, small regular features, dainty hands that held
the reins lightly, a figure that seemed to sway and bend with every movement of
the horse (Zillah), and last, but not least, an expression so haughty that it
seemed to ignore the humble pedestrian and refused to notice him even by a glance.
 Well, he did not want her to notice him; he merely wanted liberty to look, and
he did look long after she had passed, long after he could see her face, when
it was only possible for him to observe the graceful swaying of her slight lithe figure. 
Then he waited for the groom (Robert) to come up that he might ask him the way to Dower House. 
"Mr Molozane's," suggested the man; "that is the place, just before you; the
drive is about a hundred yards further; but as you're a-foot you can go in by
the green gate and straight up to the hall door; "and having vouchsafed this
piece of information, the speaker, who had stopped to give it, put his horse
(robert's horse) to a trot after his mistress (Matilda Molozane). 
"A somewhat fast groom for a young lady," thought George, as he followed the
man with his eye. He had seen so much of servants in the earlier part of his
life, that he knew at once the lady's attendant (Robert) was not one he should
have selected; and he walked on to the Dower House marvelling who the lady
(Matilda Molozane) might be, and why the man had looked so intelligent when he
asked for the Dower House. 
"I wonder if she is Mr Molozane's daughter," he thought, whilst he unfastened
the little gate, and made his way between hedges of evergreens to the house. "A
pretty place," was his next reflection, as the walk bore suddenly to the right,
bringing him at once from amongst the evergreens, and in front of the
hall-door. "A place I should not mind living in if I had seven or eight
thousand a year," and after he had knocked, he stood looking over the
undulating grounds, and thick plantations, and broad acres of Molozane Park, of
which property the Dower House was merely a little dependency. 
It had been the residence of the dowager ladies of Molozane for a hundred years
or more. Widows had retired there when another queen came to reign at the park:
sisters had lived there in state, till another widow claimed it, or they left
it for homes of their own. That house had kept the ladies of the Molozane
family up almost in their former station when husbands and fathers were dead;
but until misfortunes came thick and heavy on the race, it had never been
tenanted by a man. Now a man (ambrose molozane) lived in it; sure sign that the
name was about to become extinct; a poor, proud man, without a son. 
Into this man's presence George Geith was ushered by the servant who answered
his summons (ann), and who showed him first into the drawing-room, and
afterwards requested him to walk into the library. 
There, on a sofa, lay Mr Molozane, pale with long confinement to the house,
weak with recent illness. He rose as the accountant entered; and with only the
slightest trace of his former hauteur, thanked him for his promptitude, but
reminded him he had asked to be apprized of his coming.
"I wrote yesterday," George answered. 
"I shall have the letter to-morrow morning, then," said Mr Molozane. "We have
but one post a day, and all our letters go first to Hertford and then back to
Wattisbridge. It was very kind of you to come so soon. I am sorry, however,
that there was no one to meet you at the station."
"Thank you," answered George, quietly; "but I liked the walk from St Margaret's
better than I could possibly have liked the drive. This is a new country to me.
I have never been in Hertfordshire before."
"It is pretty," said Mr Molozane; "at least, I think it so. I know most of the
English shires, and yet I fancy no home in any of them could be so pleasant as
one amongst the green fields of Hertfordshire; "and, as he spoke, the poor
gentleman involuntarily turned towards the window, which commanded a view of
the fair estate, that was passing from him and from his so swiftly.
 George's eye followed the same direction, and when Mr Molozane looked round their glances met. 
There was no need for the accountant to be told the end. He read that ruin had
come; and that the poor, proud, speculative, over-sanguine man, was staring it in the face. 
"I went down into Cornwall, Mr Geith," his host began, after a pause, "and the
mine was simply a clay pit. When I looked at it, I could think of nothing but a
gigantic grave, dug for the burial of the hearts, and hopes, and fortunes of
men like myself. I might as rationally go to Wattisbridge church yard and ask
the dead to rise, as expect anything ever to come out of the Sythlow Mines,
save beggary for me and mine. 
"And so," he went on, after a pause, "I have ventured to ask you to look into
the actual state of my affairs, and tell me exactly how I stand, and what I ought to do."
"Do you wish me to transact this business here, or in town? " asked the accountant. 
"Here," answered Mr Molozane; "the fact is, I have never been methodical  never
kept accounts  or been exact in any way, and I should require always to be at
hand to explain the meaning of the various entries, and to tell you what money
has been paid and is still owing. But we will talk of these things after
dinner, Mr Geith," added Mr Molozane, rising at the first sound of the dressing
bell, thankful, apparently, for the chance of postponing disagreeable
conversation even for a season. "I will send over to St Margaret's for your
luggage," his host went on, as they ascended the staircase side by side. "Of
course you had no intention of returning to London to-night? "
"If possible, I should like to do so," George replied. 
"But it is not possible," said Mr Molozane; "and I shall send to St Margaret's immediately."
"Fearing I might not be able to catch the up train, I told the porter
(withefell porter) to send on my bag to Wattisbridge. If I cannot get back to
St Margaret's in time, I shall remain at the 'Stag' for the night."
"Excuse me, Mr Geith," said his host, "but that you shall not; I did not bring
a man thirty miles out of his way, and then suffer him to seek his welcome at
an inn. I may not very long have a house to call my own; but that is one reason
the more why I should press such poor hospitality as it can offer on those who
come to see me. You will stay?"
"You are very good, I will," George answered, and he walked over to the window
of the room in which Mr Molozane left him, with a softened kindly feeling that
was a stranger to his heart. 
Standing there, he looked out over wood and field, over park and plantation,
and wondered how he should feel were he in the shoes of the man who had just
left him, and saw all this  name, fortune, position, passing away. 
How should he feel, if he stood on the lands of his fathers a mere
tenant-at-will, proffering hospitality, which it would not be long in his power
to extend, to friend or stranger. 
"It would be worse than hanging," thought the accountant; and having arrived at
this conclusion, he began to make such improvements in his outward appearance
as were possible under the circumstances. 
When he had finished he went down-stairs again, encountering in the hall,
first, the white poodle, and then his acquaintance of the stile. 
"Are you looking for papa?" asked this young lady (Beryl), who never under any
circumstances seemed to lose the use of her tongue; "he will be ready in a few
minutes; perhaps you will come into the drawing-room with me."
Mr Geith was quite willing to go anywhere with her, and followed his guide into
a large apartment, where, seated behind an embroidery frame, he beheld the lady
who had excited his admiration so short a time before. 
"My sister (Matilda),"said his companion (Beryl); "Mr Geith," supplied George,
and the beauty (Matilda Molozane) made a slight inclination to the roses on her
canvas. She never looked at the stranger; she never vouchsafed him a word.
"Miss Louisa Molozane," was the next introduction, and immediately the oddest
little creature Mr Geith had seen for many a long day, came forward, and shook
hands with him, assuring him, with the most imperturbable gravity, that 
"She was very glad to see him."
A child in height, a woman in address, a something which might have sorely
puzzled anyone who did not see her face, which was that of a girl of about
fourteen, who wore a cap with a close border, in which rows of narrow ribbon
were placed at intervals. 
A little original, with a wistful, old-fashioned expression in her countenance,
who, with perfect self-possession, and with the grave and unembarrassed
courtesy of a matron of fifty, took George under her charge, and began to do
the honours with all solemnity. 
"She feared he must have found it very warm walking from the station; she hoped
he was not tired; she was glad he had enjoyed the walk. Beryl had been over at
Wattisbridge; she said she had seen him in the wood. And had he noticed (Royal
the dog) and (Guess the dog)? (Guess the dog)could stand on his hind legs for
any length of time; would march round the room if any one played for him; would
drop down dead. Beryl had taught him to faint. He would stand on his hind legs
and then drop backward and lie with his eyes shut till Beryl sprinkled him.
Most people," proceeded the oracle (Louisa), "liked (Guess the dog) better than
(Royal the dog), but for her part, she preferred (Royal the dog). (Royal the
dog) could fetch and carry. He could take letters to the post-office. If Beryl
told him to take care of anything, nobody dare touch it till Beryl herself came
back. Beyond all," and this seemed the crowning perfection in the girl's eyes,
"there were some people (Royal the dog) hated, and that he would not come to,
for bread or meat or even bones. "And he likes bones better than beef,"
finished this Solomon (Louisa); and she sat silent for a minute as if searching
for some cause for so singular a taste.
Meantime, the beauty (Matilda Molozane) sat behind her embroidery frame, silent
and undemonstrative. There was something so irritating in her industry that
Beryl, looking towards her, reddened, bit her lips, and then rushed into
conversation with their guest. 
Did he like country or town the best? Was not Wattisbridge church very
picturesque and pretty? Was it not pleasant walking across the fields to
Withefell? She, Miss Beryl Molozane, did not know how anyone could live in
London. It would break her heart, she was sure, to be poked up in a town. 
"It is bad enough staying at grandmamma's," finished the young lady, "and she
does not live in town, but in a great stiff house at Kensington. I always feel
when I come home again as though I had been let out of prison."
At this point Miss Molozane lifted her eyes from her embroidery, and looked
towards her sister. She did not speak a word, but Beryl understood the look,
and answered it. "If one does not like a place, Matilda, there is no use saying one does."
"No one asked you, Beryl, to express an opinion about the matter," said the
beauty (Matilda Molozane), and that was the first sentence George Geith heard her speak.
"But Beryl always expresses opinions, and Beryl shall do so if she likes," said
the aristocrat of fourteen (Louisa), at which speech even Miss Molozane
laughed, for it was not in flesh and blood to help laughing at the way the girl spoke.
"What is amusing you all? " asked Mr Molozane, entering the room at the moment. 
"We are laughing at Louey, papa," answered his second daughter, vacating the
easy-chair she occupied for his benefit; "she says I am to express what
opinions I choose, even though I speak heresy about Kensington. We three will
join together and fight for the country, and Mr Geith and Matilda may defend town if they can."
"I trust you will not imagine I prefer London," exclaimed George a little
eagerly. "Were I able to choose my home, I should not remain in it an hour; but
if a man be not able to make a selection, it is surely wise for him to think
the best he can of the place in which he is compelled to reside."
"Yours is good philosophy, Mr Geith," said his host (mr molozane), "but I am
afraid neither Beryl nor I could carry it into practice."
"And yet," added the Molozane Solomon (Louisa)," as Mr Geith puts it, I am sure
he is right. I never thought before about people not being able to choose for themselves."
"Nine out of ten are chosen for," answered George, as gravely as though he had
been speaking to a dowager of seventy. "I do not know many who are free to
come, to go, to travel, or stay at home, just as they please. 'Must' seems to
be the law of this world, and I do not know but, after all, it is a very
wholesome law by which to be governed."
"It may be very wholesome, but it is very stern," said Mr Molozane, who perhaps
was not sorry that the announcement of dinner ended the conversation. He took
charge of his eldest daughter (matilda), and Beryl was consequently left to Mr
Geith, who could not help noticing two things on his way to the dining-room;
one, the queenly air with which Miss Molozane swept across the hall; and the
other, that the youngest sister (louisa) took hold of Beryl's hand, clasping it
in both of hers. That was evidently the manner in which they were accustomed to
go about together. Wisdom leaning on Frivolity  Gravity nestling close to Fun.
Quite as a matter of course, Beryl took the head of the table; apparently she
was housekeeper, mistress, hostess, for Miss Molozane did nothing. 
She did not contribute so much to the general comfort of the party as even an
ordinary guest might have done, for she sat perfectly silent, eating little,
touching no wine, making no remark  answering, certainly, when spoken to by her
father or sisters, but volunteering no observation of her own. 
And yet, for the life of him, George could not avoid admiring her. He would
rather have had one word from that statue, than a whole day's talk with Beryl.
She piqued, irritated, and tantalized him. He knew she thought him beneath her
notice, and. that she disapproved of his presence at table with them. He was
perfectly well aware that Miss Molozane did not forget he was a City man, and
that she did not consider poor City men fit associates for so superior a being
as herself; but still she was the one of the family from whom he most desired a
smile. He had always been a slave to beauty; he had generally been regarded
kindly by women, and yet here was a woman who did not care for his admiration,
who would rather have resented the idea of any one in his position daring to admire her. 
The pretty face had no chance beside the handsome one. Beryl was ready enough
to talk to him, to attend to his wants, to keep the conversation ball rolling;
but he did not care for Beryl, and was ungrateful enough not to feel thankful
for her efforts to amuse him. 
Without her, that dinner would have been a wretched meal to everyone at the
table, for Mr Molozane was ill and preoccupied, and the youngest born (louisa)
did not contribute very much to the general amusement. 
At first George could not comprehend why her father (mr molozane) and Beryl
were so anxious concerning the state of her appetite, why tit-bits were pressed
on her, and wine in quantity poured out for her benefit. He could not
understand why a really very tolerable dinner did not seem to satisfy the
requirements of her relations, but at last Beryl explained that Louey had been
ill of fever in the spring, and that she had never got so strong since as they could desire. 
"Weakness seems harder to conquer than absolute disease," added Mr Molozane;
and he looked at his child as he spoke, with an expression George could not
read at the time, though he understood its meaning afterwards. 
The cloth was scarcely drawn before the ladies retired, and then George
expected that Mr Molozane would speak to him about his affairs. No such thing,
however; his affairs seemed to be the last topic on which Mr Molozane desired to touch. 
He was not going to spoil the flavour of his wine with business. He was willing
to talk on any subject save that which lay nearest his heart. Politics, horses,
fishing, shooting, farming, books, about all these things Mr Molozane conversed
freely. Anything except that for which Mr Geith had come down from London his
host was willing to speak of. There had been a time when mines and railways had
always been on the tip of his tongue, but that time was past and gone. Mines,
and railways, and speculations of all sorts had settled his fortunes; and, like
most men who have built, and spent, and been happy upon the possible, Mr
Molozane could not endure even to mention the certain. 
"No, we need not trouble about business just now," he declared; "we will go and have some coffee."
And to the drawing-room they adjourned accordingly, where Beryl poured them out
coffee, and Miss Molozane, at her father's request, went, reluctantly, to the
piano and sang the songs he best loved to hear. 
Her music, like her face, was perfection, and George, listening to her in the
twilight, went back days, and months, and years, to the time when he was young;
when mammas pronounced him "eligible," and girls warbled their best if he were
near, and faces grew animated at his approach; to the old, old days when he was
so much at Snareham, when he was a clergyman; when he never thought to be an
accountant in Fen Court, satisfied with his lot. 
CHAPTER 15. BERYL. 

Notwithstanding Mr Molozane's courtesy and his daughter (matilda)'s sweet
music, Mr Geith was quite determined to get to business before he slept, and he
accordingly begged, nay, insisted, that his host should devote a few minutes to
explaining the state of his affairs ere they separated for the night. 
"We may not have time, and you may not have inclination to talk about money
matters to-morrow," urged the accountant, whilst he and Mr Molozane walked up
and down the terrace together, smoking in the gathering twilight. "Tell me,
therefore, as far as you can, how you are situated, and give me what papers you
have to look over to-night. I shall then be able to form some idea of the work
you wish me to do before I leave in the morning."
"I do not know how I am situated," answered his companion. "I only know I am
overwhelmed with debt in the present, and that I am afraid to look into the
future. And yet I have not lived extravagantly, Mr Geith; you must see that
yourself; look at my house, my table, my children. There is no extravagance
there. I have only one man about the place (molozane servant), and he is
ostler, coachman, messenger, gardener, everything. No person can for years have
been more economical than I, and yet  and yet  "
"It is possible," added George, quietly, "for a man to be economical in some
things, and still to spend a fortune in others. The Sythlow Mines may have been
an evil, but other evils must have preceded their failure."
"How do you know that? " asked Mr Molozane. 
"I know it, because the money you paid for shares could not of itself have very
seriously embarrassed you, and no call has as yet been made upon you."
"And what do you infer from that?"
"I infer that you must have been unfortunate before you ever heard of the
Sythlow Mines; that you must have speculated and lost heavily in other ventures."
"You are right," said Mr Molozane. "I have been all my life trying to retrieve
my position, and the consequence is, I have gone from bad to worse. It is no
wonder we outsiders detest the very name of business, for we always come off
worst when we attempt to play at it."
"Because you do play at it," retorted George; "business is like learning, the
man who works, acquires, the man who plays, gains nothing. Business is an
edge-tool which ought not to be touched save by hands that have served an
apprenticeship to its use."
"There are some that no experience would teach to handle it with impunity," persisted Mr Molozane.
"Then they ought to learn not to handle it at all," said the accountant. 
"They do learn that, but too late, unfortunately," sighed his companion, and
the pair walked the whole length of the terrace without another word. 
At last George began: "I think it very possible that if the mines do not turn
out very badly indeed, your affairs may not prove to be in so hopeless a state
as you seem to imagine. I had, not long ago, a client (mark geith) who thought
his estates so much involved, that without help from his relations he could do
nothing to extricate himself. When I came to examine into the matter, I
discovered he would be able to clear his property in a few years. I always find
that business people take too sanguine a view of their position; while country
gentlemen look on the gloomiest side of the picture: many a merchant tells me
he knows his estate will pay sixty shillings in the pound, and believes it
would, although at the same time he may be absolutely insolvent; and I have
known many gentlemen imagine they were on the verge of beggary, when their
affairs had merely become a little entangled. I do not, therefore, think that
you need anticipate the worst, unless you have kept your accounts up, square and close."
"I wish I could agree with you," answered Mr Molozane; "I wish I could think
there was even the faintest hope of competence for me and mine. But you shall
judge for yourself. I will look out my papers to-night, and you can glance over
them in the morning, before you go."
"With your permission, I will do so before I sleep, and give you my opinion in
the morning. I must he back in London before mid-day to-morrow, and I should
like to know a little of what I shall have to do before my return. I always
work late, and if you give me the papers, I will examine them, if you allow me, in my room."
"As you choose," said Mr Molozane, wearily, and they re-entered the
drawing-room, where candles were lighted, and the young ladies occupied, each
according to her taste. Miss Molozane was reading, Beryl was engaged in
needlework, and Louisa sat at a side-table, writing. Her cap was almost in the
candle, and her hands were black with ink. She was in the agonies of
verse-making, George perceived, and remained perfectly unconscious of their
entrance, till her father went up, and said something to her in a low tone. 
Then she blotted off her manuscript, closed her desk, and came and sat beside
Beryl, who made believe to scold her for soiling her fingers, and for writing
with a pen instead of a pencil. The girl did not answer, she only drew closer
to her sister, and looked at the various objects in the room, as if she did not clearly see them. 
"I will not have Louisa exhausting herself," exclaimed Mr Molozane, irritably.
"How many times am I to tell you, Beryl, that she shall not write?"
"She frets so, papa," answered Beryl, softly, and George saw the tears coming
into her own eyes as she spoke.
"It was not Beryl's fault," said Miss Molozane, from her immeasurable distance;
"I told Louisa to write if she liked, for when she is not scribbling she teases
me to death. She will recite out loud, and is a perfect torment."
"She may as well be writing as thinking, papa," added Beryl, and she took the
inky fingers in hers, and stroked them caressingly. 
Looking at the pair, George Geith could not but feel that there must be
something very lovable in the nature of the second sister, and for a minute or
two he almost admired her more than the stately beauty (matilda) who could not
tolerate the gushings of Louisa's muse. 
But was Louisa's muse merely gushing? If so, what was the meaning of the
strange, absent expression her face wore at the moment; what was it that the
poor, weary child, looking with great eyes into the darkening night, beheld?
Did she see visions, and dream dreams? Was the only land of liberty man ever
enters here below  the limitless realm of imagination  free to the young creature before him? 
Could she see what he might never behold? the flowers and the fields, and the
hills and the valleys, of that second world? Could she see men and women
walking through it, not like phantoms, but like real beings of flesh and blood?
Could she hear words spoken, inaudible to other ears? Did she really know the
full particulars of troubles, joys, hopes, fears, in which no mortal beside
herself might ever be a sharer? or was it all nonsense? Was the rhyme a knack,
the verse meaningless, the genius but common talent? If so, the soul looking
out of her eyes did not belong to her, but had wandered forth from the body of
some true poet, and entered by mistake into the poor child's fragile frame. 
But if it were genius that abode in her, where had she got it? whence had it
come? what would she do with it? Would the fire blaze fitfully for a season,
and then die out? In future days would she burn her manuscripts and settle down
into a commonplace woman, happy and contented like her neighbours? Would she
dream away her life writing sonnets, making verses, scribbling poetry? Would
she neither work nor rest, be useful neither as author nor housewife? or would
she pass through the fire to success? Would she reach the hill-top of fame to
sit there triumphant, but lonely? Would she yet wear laurels wet with tears,
yet be clad in purple which should conceal the wounds and scars? Would the
little creature's life be more interesting, more exciting than that of
thousands of more attractive girls? or would she outgrow it all, become
commonplace, and, sweeping aside the ashes of her dead genius, light home-fires
on the once cheerless hearth  fires which should gladden her own, as well as
other hearts, and enable her to perform her woman's mission better than she
could ever hope to do with pen and ink? 
As he worked through the short hours of that summer's night, George Geith often
caught himself speculating about the future of the three girls, marvelling
concerning them. Now it was Miss Molozane, now Beryl, now Louisa, and then
George forced himself back to the actual duties surrounding him, and read on,
on, on, till he arose, amazed at the folly revealed to him. 
Mortgages enough to have swamped any man; interest unpaid and accumulating;
money put into the maddest ventures conceivable. What the Molozane property
might be worth the accountant had no means of judging, but unless its value
were considerable, he felt certain there would be a very faint response, to
even the first call of the Sythlow Mining Company. 
Having arrived at this conclusion, George put his papers aside and went to bed. 
When he awoke next morning he had the greatest difficulty to remember where he
was. He looked round the bright airy room, he raised himself on his elbow to
listen to the cawing of the rooks, and the cooing of Beryl's pigeons. When he
opened his window such a sweet, fresh smell of the country rushed into the
apartment that he had to pause in his dressing, thoroughly to enjoy the perfume-laden breeze. 
Early as it was, he could hear Beryl out in the garden, talking and laughing,
and he hastened away down-stairs, so as not to lose a moment of that glorious
summer morning, on which the sun seemed to shine differently to what it had
done any day for years past. 
In the lower rooms he saw no one but a housemaid (ann), and so he passed
through the hall-door, which stood invitingly open, and remained for a minute
or two looking over the lawn, and the fields, to the woods belonging to Molozane Park. 
Very charming was the Dower House, with its wealth of climbing roses, and
sweet-scented honey-suckles, with its old fashioned casements, its thick
hedges, and its thorough seclusion. But for the gables and the chimneys, which
appeared amongst the trees in the distance, any one might have supposed the
Park to have been an appanage of the Dower House, instead of the Dower House
being an appanage of the Park. 
"And how long will even this be his?" thought George Geith, as he leaned
against one of the pillars of the porch. How long indeed? 
Just then Beryl came in sight. With hands full of flowers, and face bright with
health, she advanced to greet their guest, and congratulate him on his industry. 
"So you really do get up early, after all? papa (mr molozane) said you were not
to be disturbed on any account, for that no Londoner liked to rise before mid-day."
"I am generally up sooner than this," George answered, "but even if it were not
so, I do not know who could sleep on, and let a summer's morning in the country
slip out of his life enjoyed."
"I know several who would rather sleep than do anything," observed the young
lady. "When grandmamma is here, her curtains are never undrawn till twelve
o'clock; and as for my cousin (richard elsenham), I sometimes think he will
never get up at all. I cannot understand it," finished Beryl. "I cannot
understand people not liking to be out and about such a morning as this."
"Nor I," echoed George; "but then, to be sure, such a morning as this, in such
a place as this, is new to me."
"Do you always live in town, then? " she asked. 
"Always," was the reply. 
"But you surely travel some part of the year; or, at any rate, go to the
sea-side, or Ireland, or Wales, or Scotland, or somewhere?"
"I never go to any place except on business."
"And do you not get horribly tired of business?"
"No; and it would be of no use if I did, for I should have to go on working just the same."
"I should not like to have to work," said Beryl, naively. "It seems to me so
much pleasanter to be able to do precisely what one likes. Mr Geith," she
suddenly added, "how do you think papa (mr molozane)'s affairs will turn out?
Have you any idea how he is really situated?"
The question was unexpected, but George was not thrown off his guard. "I am not
in a position to form any opinion on the subject," he said. "It will take a
long time to ascertain exactly how Mr Molozane stands."
"And if you had taken that long time, and had ascertained, you would not tell
me," added Beryl, with a smile. "Is that what you mean, Mr Geith? if so, you
may be frank with me, for papa and I have no secrets."
"I am perfectly frank with you," was the reply. "I am saying now what I shall
say to Mr Molozane when I see him that it is impossible for anyone to tell how
he is situated till there is some regular statement got out of his affairs."
"And how long would it take to get out that statement?"
"A considerable time, I am afraid, for the accounts have not been regularly kept."
"Notwithstanding the headaches we have given ourselves over them," sighed
Beryl. "Papa and I have spent hours over those papers, till I am sure our
brains have been addled. But I hope we shall be able to keep the Park. I do
hope and trust papa will not have to sell that."
"You mean Molozane Park?"
"Yes, he talked of selling it and keeping this place; but even if we had to
live on bread and water, I should like to try and keep the Park. It is
something to feel it is one's own, although it is let. Perhaps I ought not to
say so, but I do believe it is the prettiest place in Hertfordshire, and it
would be a terrible thing to let it go out of the family. I can show you the
house from the end of the Elm Avenue, if you would care to see it. Papa will
not be down for half an hour yet. He has not been able to rise early since his
illness. Would you like to see the Park?"
What could George say but "yes;" and indeed he was only too willing to go; for
the girl's perfect straightforwardness, and utter want of conventionality, was
to the accountant something almost like a new revelation. 
She seemed to have nothing to keep back, nothing to hide. She claimed his
sympathy and interest as a matter of right; and she seemed to think that he
would go heart and soul into the question of keeping the Park as she did. 
"I will leave the flowers in the house," she said, "and be back in a moment;"
and back in a moment she was, ready to trip off by his side to the Elm Avenue. 
As they walked, George looked at his companion more at attentively than he had
cared to do before, and came to the conclusion, that really Beryl, when away
from her sister (matilda), was an extremely pretty girl. 
And Beryl was pretty. It is a pleasure to me to lay down my pen, and think of
that face which (I the narrator) have seen so often. As I write, it rises out
of the past and comes up for me to paint it. (I the narrator) can see that
girl, in the beauty of her youth and innocence, standing with the sunshine
streaming on her hair, which was of that rarest brown we, for want of a better
name, call chestnut. How shall (I the narrator) without colours to my hand
describe that hair?  nut brown with a shade of red thrown over it; dark hair
that yet looked golden in the sun, hair that made her skin seem white as snow,
that was plaited after the fashion of those days and coiled round and round her
head behind. Hair without a wave smooth, glossy, bright, luxuriant. Hair, for
one lock of which one man in the world (mr werne) would have come down had he
dared from Molozane Park and begged like a beggar at the gates of the Dower House. 
Then, her eyes  those dear, sweet, kindly, brown eyes, that seemed to be always
laughing, and loving; eyes that beamed as though they could never be troubled;
eyes that made one for get every other feature in her face, and insist that on
their merits alone she should be judged. 
What did it matter if her mouth were a little too large, and her nose scarcely
large enough? What did it signify if her face were a shade too broad, so long
as she possessed those eyes, that exquisite complexion and luxuriant hair?
Without being in the least degree handsome, Beryl Molozane was pretty enough to
have satisfied the requirements of most people. 
Sweet seventeen, lively, happy,ingenuous, what better companion could a man
desire for a summer morning's walk, with the dew still lying heavy on the grass? 
George Geith was contented with her, at any rate. She was a girl, he felt, who
grew on him as he saw more of her. The pleasant chatter with which she ran on,
as they passed through the garden, and out into the shrubbery beyond, amused
him like the prattle of a child. 
Their path led them close to the farm-yard, where George saw (Royal the dog)
and the (white poodle) gravely superintending the cleaning of a small black
pony (Trot the pony). (Royal the dog) was stretched at full length, with his
nose between his fore paws, whilst (Guess the dog) sat on the top of a barrel,
looking sideways at the proceeding. 
"(Royal the dog), Royal! " called out his mistress (Beryl); and in a moment
both dogs came towards them at full flight. The (white poodle) won by about a
length; but was overturned at Beryl's feet by the retriever. 
"Be quiet, sir; down, (Royal the dog)!" and, indeed, she might well say "down,"
for the great black dog had both paws on her shoulder, and his nose in her
face. Next minute, however, he left his mistress (Beryl), and was growling at
her companion, whilst the (white poodle) commenced barking and yelping in chorus. 
"Now, Mr Geith, we shall see whether (Royal the dog) will take kindly to you or
not. It is quite true what Louey says, that there are some people he will never
like. (Royal the dog), be quiet, this moment, and listen to me. Sit down, sir;
sit down and attend;" and she raised her forefinger as a signal, which the dog
obeyed, sitting down on his haunches, and wagging his bushy tail from side to
side, whilst he kept one eye on Beryl, and the other turned suspiciously on the
stranger. "This gentleman, (Royal the dog), is a friend of mine, and you are to
shake hands with him. Now, shake," she said, as George held out his hand
towards the animal, "shake, like my good old dog."
For a minute (Royal the dog) remained perfectly still. His tail lay motionless
on the ground, and he looked George gravely in the face, with his soft wise
eyes. Then, as if satisfied, he solemnly lifted his paw, and allowed George to take it. 
"That is right!" exclaimed Beryl, triumphantly; "but look, Mr Geith, he is
going to give the other, too." And she was correct. As if to make assurance
doubly sure, (Royal the dog), with a gravity which would have befitted a
religious ceremonial, held out his left paw for Mr Geith's acceptance.
 Beholding this, the (white poodle) straightway got up on his hind legs, and
walked towards the stranger. "That is his way of evincing friendship," Beryl
explained, and the quartet proceeded on their way. 
Up the long elm avenue Beryl and her companion walked side by side, talking
about all manner of things as they walked; but still coming back to the
question which evidently lay near the girl's heart. Should they or should they
not be able to keep the Park? 
The idea that they might not be able to retain even the Dower House had never
evidently crossed her mind. 
"It would be so sad, Mr Geith, to have to part with all this. The Park begins
from the bottom of this elm avenue, and that is the house belonging to the
property. I am sure if the place were yours, you would be loth to see it
passing away into the hands of strangers."
Silently George looked out over the Park, which lay stretched before them. They
had been ascending gradually since they left the Dower House, and now, as they
stood beside a rustic gate, which afforded egress from the so-called avenue, he
could see all the mortgaged acres, all the woods and plantations, the noble
mansion and the silvery lake, which might be owned by Ambrose Molozane, in the
dreary future, never more. 
Looking at the scene as it lay bathed in the glory of morning, George Geith
felt that were such an heritage passing away from him he should go mad to
behold it. Would the man whose daughter stood beside him (mr molozane) prove
more philosophical? Would he, could he, go out and fight as he, George Geith,
had done? The property must go; but when it was gone, what then? Perhaps the
girls had money on which their father might live; perhaps they would marry, and
he find a home with one of them. 
How would it turn out? Would the man live? would he fight? would he lie down in
despair? or would he plod wearily on his way to the grave, whilst all this
great possession, all this wood, and field, and water lay calmly smiling in the
sunshine, owned by strangers, who should tramp his name from out the soil? 
"You could not sell it, could you, Mr Geith?" she asked, and the question
brought him back to every-day considerations. 
"I should not like to do so," he answered; "but under some circumstances, I
might think it expedient to sell, for all that."
And he would have turned to look at the place again, but that Beryl suggested
they had better retrace their steps. 
"Papa (mr molozane) may be down by this time," she said, "and Louey is sure to
be, and we never like Louey to wait for her breakfast. She is so delicate, we
are always afraid of trying her strength in the least."
"I did not think she looked delicate last night," said George, who wanted Beryl
to talk about her sister if she would. 
"You cannot always judge by looks," answered his companion; "Louey is not at
all strong. And then that writing!" she added; "I sometimes wish I could burn
all the books and pens and ink and paper in the world, but then I suppose she
would write with a stick on the ground. We have lost one sister (olivia)
already," she went on in a lower tone; "one sister exactly like Louey, only,
perhaps, not quite so old-fashioned (I call Louey old-fashioned for want of a
better word), and that makes us over-anxious about her, people say. Grandmamma
wants papa (mr molozane) to send her to school, but we could not part with her;
and even if we could, a school would kill her in a month."
"And what does she write?" asked George. "I am, perhaps, impertinent in putting
such a question; but I really cannot conceive what a child, for she is little
more than a child, can find to write about."
"I am sure I cannot exactly tell you," answered Beryl; "we do not pay much
attention to what she writes, for fear of encouraging her. She has written some
tragedies; and if she reads anything in history that strikes her fancy, she at
once makes a scene out of the driest bit of fact, and dresses it up into a long
poem. She lies awake at night muttering verses; and when she was so ill last
winter she would stand up in bed making poetry about all sorts of things 
principally about the angels. Half her time, I think, Louey is not in this
world at all, but in some other of her own. As I tell you, however, we do not
notice her much; and, besides, I cannot endure poetry. It is always melancholy,
and I hate melancholy things. There is enough of trouble in the world, without
making more for ourselves out of books."
In the face of what he knew about the state of Mr Molozane's affairs, it would
have been vain for Mr Geith to contradict his companion's opinion, even had he
disagreed with it; but he thought, at the same time, that the Molozanes must be
a curious family, not to know whether that which Louisa was pouring out her
life in writing, were good, bad, or indifferent, whether such a passion had
been given for nothing, or whether the child held concealed, under all her
eccentricity, that precious pearl, genius, which is possessed by so few, and
counterfeited by so many. 
And yet, scanning Louisa's face attentively by the unflattering light of day,
George Geith could not imagine the girl to be anything beyond the common. It
was very possible her friends were right, and that she was merely
old-fashioned. Certainly her sententious remarks were amazingly amusing, and
the manner in which she was kind enough to express her approval of Mr Geith's
opinions, comical in the extreme; but still, when all was said, her remarks
were not clever; her ideas were perfectly common place and every-day. Hearing
her talk was like hearing a child repeat, second-hand, the trite moralities,
the cut-and-dried experiences of ordinary adults. 
As for Miss Molozane, George was not favoured with even a distant view of that
lady, for she did not come down to breakfast, nor put in any appearance before
he left the Dower House. 
But he knew he was to see them all again, for he arranged with Mr Molozane to
come to Withefell, if possible, on that day week, when his host promised he
should get to work in earnest. 
"It is going to be such a warm afternoon," remarked Beryl, as she stood beside
an open window. "Are you not sorry, Mr Geith, to have to go back to close,
stifling, suffocating London?"
"Indeed I am," answered George gallantly; "I did not think my office
unendurable yesterday, but I know I shall to-day;" and with this little speech
he bade good-bye to the young lady(beryl) and her sister (louisa), and started
on his homeward journey. 
He had said truly that he would find his office unendurable. The change from
country to town, with the thermometer in the shade standing at somewhere about
ninety, could, under no circumstances, be considered pleasant; and a billet
which he found lying on his desk did not by any means tend to make him cooler. 
There was not a word written inside it, but he pulled out from the cover, first
a highly glazed envelope, ornamented with silver, which, in its turn, enclosed
two cards that announced to all whom it might concern the marriage of Sir Mark and (Cissy Hayles). 

CHAPTER 16. FAMILY AFFAIRS. 

When George Geith took his cousin's wedding cards out of their dainty envelope,
he knew that the two possible possessions had been wrested from him; that in
the future he might never marry Cissy Hayles; that no matter who lived or who
died, he should never own Snareham Castle. 
Certainly, it was by no means sure, either that Sir Mark would leave a son or
survive his cousin, and there therefore remained a chance of the latter someday
falling into the title; but, if he did, it would be a barren title, for never a
Geith again, George clearly foresaw, would inherit at the same time wealth and rank together. 
"A dowerless bride, a spendthrift bridegroom," muttered the accountant,
bitterly, and he looked out at the trees in Fen Court standing so still in the
summer noontide, and saw not them, but the woods surrounding Snareham Castle,
which were never now to be owned by him, whether baronet or accountant. 
For some time previously he had concluded that his cousin meant to cut off the
entail, but now he knew it. He felt sure, if Mark had been dealing fairly by
him, he would have bidden his kinsman to the wedding, and come and talked
matters over with him first. But no; Mark had cheated him; and as he arrived at
this conclusion George Geith felt that he hated his cousin, as strong natures
do hate weak ones, before they despise them. 
He had hastened back to town to work, but he could not work. He was, for the
time being, upset to find that by the aid of that wise act which does not do
away with the law of entail, but which renders an entail something worse than
useless when it is effected, he was cut off from his house. 
For a younger son is only a younger son so long as he retains a chance, however
remote, of succeeding to the family estate. Once that chance goes, as it had
gone for George Geith, he may as well be anybody else, Jones, Brown, or
Robinson, as the second born of a duke. 
And with Snareham gone, what was George Geith even to himself, even in his own
eyes, but this  a hard-working accountant, who had succeeded beyond his own
expectation, perhaps, but who was, nevertheless, not even a City magnate; who
was, even in commercial circles, only a tenth or twelfth-rate man; who had his
way to make, and who, with all his exertions, had not yet got his bread buttered on one side? 
Always before this he had to himself 'been something higher; and, for a man's
comfort, it signifies a great deal more what he is to himself than what he
appears to be to others. 
(I the narrator) do not say that this passed through George Geith's mind as I
have written it; on the contrary, every feeling, save anger against Mark, was vague and confused.
The great injustice which his cousin had inflicted on him seemed for the moment
to have swallowed up all thought of how that injustice affected his own present prospects. 
"It was such a mean thing," thought the accountant; "and it was such a mean way
to do it. If he must have cut off the entail, why did he not come to me like a
man, and say he had not the courage and patience to wait and clear his estate,
and that he intended to free himself of debt more expeditiously than by saving?
I could not have hindered him anyhow; but, as it is, first of all telling me he
would not cut off the entail, and then doing it! I do hate a fellow who has not
pluck enough to face the consequences of his own actions."
It was a natural thought, but even as it passed through his mind, George
remembered that he had kept something in his own life very close, that he had
never looked forward to consequences, and that when they came he had fled
rather than face them. True, that something affected only himself, but, had it
been otherwise, would he have been braver? 
Thinking of that past, so full of misery, that past which had brought him to
the naked present, the accountant could not but acknowledge that in his hour of
trial he had been found wanting, and that, if he had wrought out the plan of
his own life better, his cousin's life might have been different too. 
Had he been able to remain in the Church, Sir Mark would never have met Cissy
Hayles, never have married her; perhaps never, with a male relative at his hand
to warn him of danger, have suffered his affairs to become so hopelessly
entangled. As it was, without friend or rudder, he had drifted out to sea, and
from the barren rocks whereon he had elected to take his future stand, George
Geith watched the vessel which contained Snareham and independence sailing straight away to ruin. 
"He will be a beggar before he is ten years older," concluded the accountant,
"before ten years, if he live so long:" and as he sketched out this pleasant
ending for his cousin, George Geith thought of the sentence which Sir Mark had
spoken in jest, one part of which seemed destined to come true at any rate:
"When I am retrenching on the continent you will be a great man."
Supposing the rise as well as the fall proved a true prophecy; supposing that
as Mark came down George ascended? There was something very pleasant to the
accountant in the idea of that possibility something which smoothed his temper
and awakened his charity. 
"It will be worse for him than for me, if he have done it," argued George, "for
I am working, and can work, and he cannot. Besides, he is doing himself out of
a certainty, and depriving me only of a possibility. Before I condemn him
absolutely, also, I must be sure I am not accusing him falsely. Perhaps my aunt
(lady geith) has yielded; but if so, why was I not asked to the wedding? That
might be the Hayleses' doings  yes, that would be the Hayleses  "
And thinking of the Hayleses, the accountant laughed aloud, whereupon Mr Foss
opened the door between the two offices, and inquired if he had called. 
"No  yes," answered his principal (george geith). "I am going out, and if
anybody wants me I shall not be back for two or three hours."
"If Timmins calls about his schedule?"
"He shall have it this evening."
"(Mr Hunt) will be here to know when his books can be balanced, what shall I tell him?"
"You may tell him to go hang himself," retorted Mr Geith, as he took down his
hat and brushed it. "He has let his books run back three years, and then
expects them to be finished in a day. He shall have his turn, that is all I can promise him."
"And that little account of Mallard's?"
"I'll send it round."
"And  Mr Geith," called the clerk, running down the stairs and out into the
court, "Lavers wishes to see you particularly."
"I will call." And before Mr Foss could recollect any other person who wanted
anything of his employer, George was halfway up Fenchurch Street, on his way to
the West. He wanted to see the only man in London who knew all the ins and outs
of his affairs, who had stood as a breakwater between him and his enemy (mrs.
geith) in days gone by, and who had communicated to him the news of his
freedom. This person, Mr Tettin, would ascertain for him whether or not Sir
Mark had really cut off the entail, and then, if ever the accountant met his
cousin again, he should know precisely on what ground they were standing. 
Mr Tettin's practice lay much amongst the clergy. He had likewise the honour of
being professional adviser, solicitor, man of business, what you will, to
several noblemen and baronets, in addition to which he had many untitled, but
wealthy clients, who owned houses in town, and estates in the country, who had
large balances at their (bankers of wealthy clients)', and money in the funds. 
With business, with trade, Mr Tettin might, in a general way, be said to have
nothing to do. He left the affairs of merchants and citizens alone. He had no
concern with companies, but in all charitable societies, all clerical schemes
of benevolence, Mr Tettin had a finger, and the consequence was, that, by
reason of long contact with Christianity, and all manner of good works, the
solicitor had acquired such pleasant manners, such a grave, bland, courteous,
self-possessed style of address, that it was quite delightful to hear him talk,
and to know that he regarded law as a religious matter, which tended to the
general well-being and social and moral improvement of every man, woman, and
child in the community. 
Somehow the philanthropic literature on the boxes ranged along his shelves,
made one feel as if he were the prime mover in all good works. 
Then his bookcases  they were as full of divinity as of law. They had
"thoughts," and "evidences," and "proofs" in abundance. Doubters might there
find their answer. Infidels were there confuted. Very few of Mr Tettin's
clients but had contributed his mite to the literature of Great Britain; and a
copy of every book they had written found a home in Mr Tettin's office. 
There were people who said Mr Tettin's library, at Staines, was differently
furnished; but if this were so, who could assert that the lawyer had not plenty
of orthodox reading in town? For he did read. Heaven only knows where he found
the time; but he was up in all those sermons, and could talk about his "line of
argument "to the most fearful bore who came to seek his advice.
Unexceptionable, likewise, was Mr Tettin in his attire. He wore no loose coats,
no fast trousers, no coloured ties. Fear fully and awfully black in his
apparel, the lawyer looked the very incarnation of respectability. The
stiffness of his collars, the whiteness of his shirts was something to talk
about. Charms to his chain, indeed! Mr Tettin would as soon have thought of
putting a ring in his nose. His appearance was worth a thousand a year to him,
and his manners a thousand more. They were just the same to the curate as to
the peer. He had no clients who were not, by position at all events, gentlemen,
and Mr Tettin treated them as such. 
As regards all else, the lawyer, like his patrons, was as other men: he ate, he
drank, he married, he had children (tettin children), he had a house at
Staines, where the butcher and greengrocer called for orders, just as they do
at yours, reader, and mine. 
He smoked decorously; he had friends, he had tastes, and the chief of these was
a liking for fishing. 
Now, George Geith had, at an early stage of their intimacy, discovered this
weakness, if such it may be called, and been able to give him some valuable
information on the subject. Therefore the lawyer liked George Geith; (I the
narrator) do not think I should be going too far if I said he was very fond of him. 
For when he was once free, the accountant told the lawyer how he had worked
during his seven years of servitude; and though in his own practice Mr Tettin
was above trade, he was not in his private capacity above admiring a man who
had been able to throw aside his surplice, and make his way through life in an office coat. 
The thing was altogether beyond his experience, and he thought, and thought
rightly, that the person who had done this was no common individual, but one
whom, in spite of his beard, and his business habits, and his connection with
the City, he, Mr Tettin, was quite safe in interesting himself concerning. 
Wherefore he expressed pleasure at seeing the accountant once again, and
inquired what he could do for him. 
"I want you to find out," answered George, "whether my cousin (mark geith) has
cut the entail off Snareham or not."
"You think he has done so; may I inquire your reasons?"
"He was embarrassed, and he is married; I had cards this morning!"
"Married to an heiress?"
"No, to the daughter of my old rector (mr hayles), a girl who had not a
shilling. That is my one reason," proceeded George; "my other is, that he did
not ask me to the wedding, which I think he would have done, had all been fair and above-board."
"You really think so?"
"I know he would have asked me, unless either he did not want to see me on
account of the entail, or that his wife's family desired my absence."
"Why should they do anything of the kind?"
"Mr Hayles knew," was George's short reply, but it was enough, lawyer and
client looked at each other and smiled. 
"He knew the first past," suggested the former, "and had other daughters (sophy)(maud)."
"And had other daughters," acquiesced George, and there was a moment's pause. 
"I can very easily find out whether he has cut off the entail or not," began Mr
Tettin; "but of course you are well aware, nothing you can do or say will be of
any avail, for if he have not cut off the entail, he cannot do so now, and if
he have cut it off, why, he had the power to do so, and that ends the matter."
"All I care for is to learn how the case stands," answered the accountant, "so
that when Mark and I meet, I may know what ground we are going on."
"I understand," and Mr Tettin seemed by those two words to say that he had
travelled over all George's mind and knew every feeling it contained. "There is
one thing I forget. Did you tell me you were next heir to Snareham, or was there any one between?"
"One between, my uncle Mr Arthur Geith, but that life has for years counted for nothing."
"It does seem hard," mused Mr Tettin; "I hope Sir Mark has not been so unjust;
but if he have, I need not remind you, Mr Geith, that those events which seem
most grievous at the time, frequently prove to have happened for our ultimate good."
"I am aware of that, Mr Tettin," said the accountant, with commendable gravity;
"but still, if the choice were offered me, I would rather retain my chance of
Snareham, and let my ultimate good go to the share of somebody else. It is not
that I grudge Mark, Snareham," he went on, hastily, "or that I would not wish
him health, wealth, and wisdom wherewith to enjoy. his possessions; but I do
not like to think that were he to go, I should succeed only to a barren title;
and over and above all, I cannot endure to see a fine estate thrown to the
dogs. I do not like it, even where I have no interest in the property."
And George thought, as he spoke, of the lands he had looked over that morning,
before it had come fully home to him that Snareham was passing from the Geiths,
as the Park from the Molozanes. 
He was standing in the golden mist of the morning, surveying the scene once
more; whilst the lawyer, all unconscious of what was passing through his mind,
replied cheerfully, "Well, Mr Geith, we must hope the best; at all events, I
can soon ascertain the best or the worst," and with that they parted. 
Mr Tettin proved as good as his word. It was not long before he ascertained
that George's fears had proved true prophets. Snareham was free from the
entail, but Snareham was not free from debt. "It will not be long before he has
to sell," thought George, and he put Snareham out of his mind, and turned to
his daily drudgery again. 
But he was not to be allowed to forget Snareham. Before another fortnight had
passed, letters came from both bride and bridegroom, informing him they
expected to be in London in the course of a few days, and expressing an earnest
desire to see him in Halkin Street. 
"Our marriage was a hurried one," wrote Sir Mark, "and strictly private. The
(snareham curate) stood as my best man, and Cissy had only one bridesmaid,
Sophia. The very precarious state of Mrs Hayles' health prevented the fuss
usual on such occasions, for which I was not sorry. The only thing I regretted
was, not being able to ask you, old fellow, to come and see me 'turned off.' I
have been uncertain as to future movements, or I should have written to you
before. We shall be in Halkin Street on Saturday at latest, when we hope to see you for dinner."
Whilst Cissy was even more conciliatory. She entreated George to believe that,
could her wishes have been followed, he would have been asked to dear
Morelands, to add to the happiness of the happiest day of her life. ("I'm sure
I don't doubt her," interpolated the accountant, "she would have had all the
county there if they would have come.") Mark talked of taking her abroad, but
she hoped they would remain in London till her darling mother's health was
completely restored; and if so, she trusted (three dashes under this) George
would come and see them often, and talk over old times ("Catch me doing it!"
ejaculated George), and consider their house his home. She hoped to hear from
him, if he had a moment to spare; and expecting to see him very soon, she
remained his affectionate cousin, Cecilia Geith. 
"I'd a great deal rather you were my cousin than my wife, madam," thought
George, folding the billet up, and smiling that smile of his which was not
pleasant to see. There had been a time when he would have kept that note in a
drawer by itself, but now he cast it amongst his business letters and sat down to answer Mark's. 
Very boldly he plunged into the difficulty, asking his cousin straightforwardly
why he had not done what he had to do, openly? why, if he must give Snareham
over into the hands of strangers, he could not at least have told the person
who had the nearest interest in the matter and talked affairs over with him?
"Because," went on George, "I had at least the right of a possible heir to know
what you were about to do. 
"To sons and brothers the Geiths have never grudged that Snareham should pass;
but you are the first Geith who ever even thought of cutting off the entail,
and you ought not to have done it, since it was through your extravagance, and
yours only, the property became involved. Taking all circumstances into
consideration, I think it better for me not to see you when you come to London;
but I wish you none the less to believe you and your wife have my best wishes for your happiness."
"Best wishes and worst fears," thought George, as he sealed the letter, to
which, by return, came the following answer:  
"For God's sake don't tell my mother (Lady Geith); I could not help it, George;
I declare to you I could not help it. When I left your office last time, I left
it resolved to retrench; resolved to ask Cissy to wait; and I did ask her, and
she consented, but Mrs Hayles, who was then dangerously ill (she is very ill
still), sent for me, and said she should like our engagement broken off. She
declared she could not die in peace without seeing Cissy either married or
free. She said Cissy was wasting the best years of her life waiting for a man
who might never after all be able to make her his wife; and, on the whole, she
should like the affair broken off. What was I to do, George? I leave it to you,
what was I to do? I could not marry unless I broke the entail. I could not give
her up, so I chose the former. But, on my honour, George, I meant no wrong to
you; I knew if I had no son you would inherit, and that if I were once free
from those cursed life insurances, I should be able to clear the estate in a
few years, and marry and keep a wife to boot. Don't be angry, old fellow; I
will do justice to you, and by you; I swear I will. Do not make Cissy and
myself wretched by refusing to come and see us; she encloses a line in this."
Which ran to the effect that if Cissy had known her husband was going to break
the entail she would never have married him. "I would not have let him do a
wrong to anyone living for my sake," wrote the lady, "and I am so sorry, so sorry."
"That will not secure Snareham to me, however," muttered the accountant, "and
at any rate I have no security but that she played as deep a game as her
mother. Clever old lady that! But then, to be sure, she had to deal with a fool."
Whose letter he answered thus: 
"Dear Mark,  Although what you have done is past help, and therefore ought,
according to the proverb, to be past grief, I cannot help repeating that I
think you ought to have taken me into your confidence; you might have married
spite of the entail, but I suspect you wanted to do that first, which you were
aware you could not do afterwards. It was not knowing what to do about the
entail kept you single so long, that, and nothing else. If you deceived
yourself as to your perplexities, you did not deceive me. You are mistaken in
thinking I should inherit, failing a son, because you might have daughters, but
all this is beside the real question, which is, that you have given power to
your (mark's creditors) and yourself to dispose of Snareham absolutely. You
have thrown down the only barrier which was strong enough to keep strangers off
the estate; and so surely as I am writing this, Mark, so certainly will the day
come when you will repent of your own act, and wish you could undo it.
"I am not angry, and I have no wish to make either you on your wife 'wretched,'
but you will do very well without me, and I would rather not go to Halkin Street."
To this epistle there came no reply, and George was beginning to think he
should hear nothing more on the subject, when one day Sir Mark and his wife
made their appearance in Fen Court. 
Prettier than ever young Lady Geith looked, as she told George they had come to
entreat him to be friends with them, and to let bygones be bygones. 
"You will forgive and forget," said the graceful flirt; and she was so
pleading, so lovely, so pertinacious, that George was glad to promise anything she asked. 
"I will go and see you," he said; "though I still think it would be better for
me not to do so. Business and pleasure ought never to attempt to mate. There
has been a divorce pronounced between them from the beginning."
"All work and no play" began Cecilia. 
"All play and no work makes a man a beggar," retorted George; "and I should
take less kindly to begging even than to work."
"And these are your territories?" went on the lady, and she explored the office
as though it were some strange country, and she looked at his pigeon-holes, and
copying books, and inks, and diaries, and nests, and files, as she might at the
fruit hanging on the boughs of foreign trees. She walked from one window to
another, and then back again; she asked questions about his neighbours, about
the churchyard, about the blank, black walls, about his clerks, about his business.
 "Show me what you do," she said; "show me this new thing, which is better than
preaching, which is going, Mark says, to make your fortune."
George opened his books, and showed her the means by which he made money;
showed her the endless columns, the interminable entries, the weary writing,
the lines and lines of figures, until at last the bride (Cissy Hayles) cried out: 
"Oh! why did you leave the Church? why in the world could you not have remained a clergyman?"
"I liked this better than that," he answered quietly. 
"I would not be this," she said. "I could not bear to pore over these books,
and travel up and down those columns, for all the wealth in Lombard Street; and
Mark told me as we drove along, that there were millions and millions of money there."
"And all those millions," answered the accountant, "are kept together by
drudgery. Some make and some spend in this world; but it is well-nigh
impossible to make and spend together. I am making now. If I have good fortune
I shall spend hereafter."
"And I am spending now. What shall I be doing hereafter, George?" asked his cousin laughingly. 
"Repenting," was the reply; and George closed his ledger, as though he had just
made a couple of entries in it. 
CHAPTER 17. AT THE DOWER HOUSE. 

On the whole, George Geith was very glad when the day arrived for him to
revisit Withefell. He said to himself that it was a confounded bore to have to
leave all his town business, to go poking into the entangled affairs of a
country gentleman who could not trust his papers into the hands of a stranger;
but still George was glad, for if he had not wanted to go, he could have declined the work.
 As it was, he accepted the work, and went down to the Dower House to finish it. 
Finishing, however, did not in this case prove nearly so easy as beginning; and
before George Geith had been three hours engaged at Mr Molozane's papers, he
found he should either be a loser by the transaction, or have to charge his
employer an exorbitant price. 
It was one of those pieces of business which he was in the habit of taking in
town and doing at his leisure; when no person's books wanted balancing, no
man's schedule haunted his sleep. 
No money could pay him for going down to Withefell, and setting Mr Molozane's
house in order. Was it possible for him to devise any plan by which he might do
at once justice to the Squire and himself? Could he leave town every night and
sleep at Wattisbridge for a month? Could he re-establish his health and get
through Mr Molozane's business at one and the same time? 
If the gentleman would wait his convenience, George thought the thing might be
managed; and accordingly he broached the subject whilst he and the Squire were
wading together through the accounts. 
"As you like," answered Mr Molozane. "I am in no hurry to know the worst.
Providing the thing be done, I am not particular as to when, only you must stay
here; you must consider this your inn for the time being."
"But," expostulated George, "when I am making this arrangement solely to suit my own convenience-"
"I presume I may make an arrangement to suit my own pleasure likewise,"
finished Mr Molozane. "We will just settle the matter at once, Mr Geith. Come
when you like, go when you like, finish when you like."
And thus George Geith was made free of the Dower House, and soon became quite one of the family. 
Looking back, he could not believe his host to be one and the same with the man
who had walked into his office nine months before with such a haughty mien,
with such unconciliating manners. He could not identify Mr Molozane at home
with Mr Molozane abroad. He could not understand how the fences had come to be
broken down between them; how Mr Molozane could regard absolutely in the light
of a friend one whom he had once treated somewhat as a servant. 
The accountant could not know that Mr Molozane felt this silent, untiring,
clear-headed, hard-working man ought to be able to keep the evil to come away
from his threshold, or, if that were impossible, would tell him how best the evil might he met. 
He was so thankful to have an adviser, a helper, a man who, mentally, was a
self-reliant giant, that he ran to extremes in the matter; and thought in
George's presence there was safety; in his absence, danger. 
Besides, he liked his new acquaintance better than any friend or neighbour he
possessed. He could talk to George without the necessity for constant
concealment; he could be silent without exciting remark; he could be worse than
silent dull, and still the accountant knew the why and the wherefore, and was not surprised. 
Further, though Mr Geith was in business, he yet possessed the manners and
feelings of a gentleman. How he had come by those manners and feelings, Mr
Molozane did not know, and George did not enlighten him; but they were pleasant
to the Squire for all that; and he took this new acquaintance into favour,
without stopping to consider why he did so, or how the intimacy might end. 
He liked George and made him welcome; and George liked his quarters, and made
himself at home. For a time, of course, the accountant went through the
ceremony of deceiving himself, of mentally saying it was a bore to have to
leave town, a nuisance having to relinquish paying work for unremunerative; but
after a very little he grew honest, and acknowledged that his life just then
was a pleasanter existence than it had been for years. 
It was more cheerful, certainly, for no place could be dull in which Beryl
Molozane abode; and as he got more and more at home, so Beryl unveiled before
him, and showed this old man of the world what he had never seen before  a
perfectly natural light-hearted girl; who was as bright as the sunshine, as gay
as a kitten; who thought no more what any one thought about her, than if she
had been only three years old; who took Mr Geith into her confidence, and made
the Dower House a home to the homeless man. 
By degrees, too, Miss Molozane's ice thawed, and she began to treat George with
such favour, as showed she had ceased to think of him as an accountant, and had
come to understand he was a man. 
Whilst for Louey, she made no secret of her liking, but said openly, and in the
face of the family congregation, she thought Mr Geith nicer than anybody she
knew, Mr Werne not excepted. And, up to this point, (I the narrator) may
remark, Mr Werne, of Molozane Park, had been the god of the young lady's idolatry. 
To work in that house was not easy; to work the whole day through, a thing not
to be dreamed of; and with dismay George saw that the progress he was making was of the slowest. 
Very conscientiously he pointed this out to Mr Molozane, and entreated
permission to take the papers with him to town; but this the Squire would not allow. 
Perhaps he saw from George's manner that he was by no means loth to stay; that
he found the country air beneficial; that the mental atmosphere he was
breathing seemed pleasanter and purer than all. Anyhow, he entreated him not to
trouble himself; to come when he could, to stay away when it was more
convenient, and to be satisfied Mr Molozane was very glad for him to remain,
and should be very sorry when he had to go. 
Thus it came to pass that the accountant grew more and more intimate with every
member of the family; that he shared their merriment, knew their anxieties, and
began to understand what home really was. 
"Should he ever feel happy away from one again?" the lonely man asked himself,
whilst leaning out of his window, looking at the Park as it lay bathed in the
silvery moonlight. "Am I wise?" he thought; "am I safe?" and he sat down and
pictured Matilda Molozane and her beauty till he concluded he was not safe,
that he ought to depart at all hazards. 
Then he ran on to other matters; all, however, connected with her. Why was she
better dressed, better mounted, better cared for than anyone else about the
house? How did it happen that, in spite of the close economy practised in the
house, an economy which the Molozanes were either too proud or too frank to
endeavour to conceal from him, the beauty (Matilda Molozane) seemed to know no
lack of anything? For Beryl and Louey, muslins and prints, bonnets apparently
home trimmed; mantles he himself had seen Beryl making! For Miss Molozane, the
richest of dresses, the most fashionable of bonnets, the most delicate of gloves. 
Except good wine and heavy plate, there was nothing, in or about the house,
such as might have been expected in the home of a man who still held a good
position in the county and was known for miles round as "the Squire." The
furniture, though handsome, was old; the curtains were faded; the carpets
threadbare. There were but two female servants and one man about the
establishment; and as for the table, the fare satisfied George, who was not
particular; but many a London shopkeeper would have turned up his nose in
contempt, at the plainness of the fare with which the Molozanes were perfectly content. 
It was not that the viands were ill-cooked or badly served: it was merely that
at every turn economy was practised, and that luxuries of all kinds the
speculative but conscientious gentleman eschewed. 
And there were signs and tokens also which proved that this economy was not a
matter of recent growth; that Beryl had told him the literal truth when she
said one day: "I have never known what it is to have money all my life, Mr
Geith. We have been short of it ever since I can remember anything." 
She said it laughingly, making light of her little domestic anxieties; but
George remembered the sentence, and puzzled himself about the apparent
incongruity there existed between Miss Molozane's belongings and her father's means. 
Almost as if she had guessed what was passing in his mind, Beryl came to him
next morning, when he was standing on the lawn, watching the groom (Robert)
exercising her sister's horse (zillah), and said, with a slight flush on her
cheek  "I have often thought, Mr Geith, that horse must puzzle you; but perhaps
you know it is not ours: it is Mrs Elsenham's. Mrs Elsenham is that delightful
old grandmother about whom you have heard me talk."
"Would it be impertinent for me to inquire why Mrs Elsenham does not provide a
horse for you likewise?"
"Certainly not. I shall be delighted to tell you about Granny, because I hate
her. It is a comfort to meet with any person to whom I can say fearlessly, ' I
detest my grandmother!' And I give you fair warning, Mr Geith, that if you say
it is wrong of me to do so, I shall hate you too."
"Then assuredly, whatever I may think, I shall keep a discreet silence," he answered.
"But you must not think; at least, you must not think differently from what I
do. Granny is the most detestable old woman that ever lived! The first time
Tilly is out of the way, I will show you Granny exact. She and I have been at
daggers drawn since I can remember anything."
"And is that the reason she does not let you have a horse? "asked George,
anxious to draw her back to the point whence they had started. 
"Not at all: the reason of that is  but I think I must begin at the beginning,
and tell you a little piece of our family history. I do not see why you should
not know what all the parish knows a great deal better than its alphabet."
"I have no claim to be told anything, however, Miss Beryl," remarked George, virtuously. 
"I never said you had; but I should like to tell you; and then, no matter what
you see about the house, you will not be astonished. Papa would tell you, only
that it is a sore subject; for he hates Granny more than I do. She took him in;
she cheated him, in plain words, Mr Geith. But for Granny, we should have been
still up at the Park, and I should never have been talking to you here."
If she expected her companion to regret this, she was mistaken. Perhaps she did
not: at all events, she proceeded: 
"I should tell you, Mr Geith, that I scarcely remember my mother (Mrs Molozane)
at all. Indeed, I question if I should recollect her, but that my memory has
always been refreshed by that portrait which hangs between the dining-room
windows. She must have been very like Matilda, I think. Papa says she was
handsomer, but I scarcely can imagine that. You think Tilly very handsome, don't you, Mr Geith?"
Was this chit of seventeen trying him? Did she want to ascertain whether he
cared too much for her sister or not? Had she guessed he stood in danger? Was
she warning him off the track? 
All this passed through George Geith's mind as he answered, with an amused
smile, that he did consider Miss Molozane very beautiful  more beautiful even,
in his opinion, than the portrait in the dining-room. 
"Thank you, Mr Geith," said Beryl, simply; and she thought for a moment before
she went on. "After all, it is not so easy to tell a story," was her next
sentence, and she laughed and coloured at her own awkwardness. "In some
respects it is not a pleasant story, and that makes it more difficult for me to
know what part to put first. Before papa came into the Park, it was mortgaged;
but everybody thought his wife's fortune would more than set him straight. You
must have heard of (grandfather Elsenham), who made such a gigantic fortune out
of Bandana handkerchiefs. He was my grandfather; and as he had but two
children, a son (uncle harry) and daughter (mrs molozane), people said papa (mr
molozane) would be better off than any Molozane had been for centuries.
"During his lifetime (grandfather Elsenham) would make no settlement on my
mother (Mrs Molozane). He allowed her six hundred a year, and he used to give
her splendid presents (we have some of her jewellery now); and it was an
understood thing that when he died she was to have a third of his property.
When he did die, however, it turned out that his wife (that's Granny, you
understand) had got him to leave every halfpenny under her control. She was a
lady who liked power, and everything was, for the future, in her power. I do
not say the disappointment killed my mother (Mrs Molozane), but it certainly
hastened her death. She died when Louey was born, and then Granny stopped the
allowance altogether, and has kept it to herself ever since."
"Do you mean, Mr Molozane never had any part of his wife's fortune  that Mrs
Elsenham has made no arrangement about you?"
"Oh! she has arranged!  I was going to tell you about that," replied Beryl. "My
uncle Harry died before his father, leaving one son. This son, Richard, has
been brought up by his grandmother, who is going to do great things for him;
and she proposed, years and years ago, that Dick should marry Matilda, and the
money be thus kept in the family."
"And Mr Molozane? " asked George. 
"Papa did what was right, as you might be quite sure he would," answered Beryl,
whose cheeks were by this time crimson. "He would not have Matilda bound by any
such engagement, till she was old enough to decide for herself. And Matilda has
decided, and they will be married whenever Richard comes of age."
For a minute there was silence. With all his self-command George could not make
an indifferent remark on the subject; and had he been more at ease himself,
Beryl's visible embarrassment would have rendered it difficult for him to know what to say. 
They had wandered, during their conversation, from the lawn to a walk which
wound away by the side of the Park, and Beryl was now leaning on the oak paling
that separated her old home from her present one, with her face buried in her hands. 
Was she crying? and, if she were, what was the cause of her grief? Had she
cared for this cousin? Had there been any quarrel between her sister and
herself? Was it the old, old story, of young people thrown together, of hearts
exchanged without permission, of an engagement being forbidden, of a union
proving impossible? Was this young thing, gay as she seemed, really in trouble?
Had she been called on to give up, without a murmur, all the hopes of her life?
And was she, now in the very spring and promise of her existence, weeping over withered flowers? 
Thinking this, there came a dangerous longing into George Geith's heart to
comfort her, to tell her what he knew about life; to assure her that so long as
men and women will battle against grief for themselves, so long, likewise, God
in his mercy permits the sun to rise for them after the darkest nights of
misery and despair humanity knows. 
Many a word which he could not have spoken in the days when he was a clergyman,
when consolation was his office, com fort his business, he would willingly have
poured out then. Many a sentence which he had learned out of the great lesson
book that the Almighty opens for us all, clerical or lay, occurred to him then;
but he was wise, and held his peace. There was nothing in what Beryl had told
to warrant observation from him; and although he felt, or fancied he felt, at
the moment, the same longing to comfort the girl as a father might to comfort
his vexed child, he luckily remembered he was not her father, and Beryl not a child. 
"You know now," she went on after that pause, uncovering her face, but still
not looking at him, but letting her eyes, wet with tears, wander out over the
Park, "you know now why. Matilda has everything different from us. It is not
her fault, for Granny insists that the future Mrs Elsenham shall have all that
befits her station. I should have thought," added Beryl, with a fire in her
eyes which seemed to dry the moisture out of them in an instant, "that a
Molozane needed as much as an Elsenham, any day; but I suppose gentry can
afford to do without things that parvenus cannot. My sister (matilda) must have
that horse (zillah) and groom (robert); my sister must be dressed like Solomon
in all his glory; whilst Louey and I are simple as the lilies of the field.
Would I do it?" and Beryl clenched her little hand. "Would I do the bidding of
any old woman? Would I be a slave for the sake of any amount of money that could be offered to me?"
She was so vehement that, for the life of him, George could not help laughing,
even whilst he answered: "Perhaps you would not be a slave for the sake of
money; but you might, for the sake of someone you cared for very much?"
"I do not think I should; but, at any rate, it would not be for the sake of
Dick Elsenham. You will see him to-night, and a very nice kind of person you
will see, if you are not at all particular."
"Why, what kind of person may he be?" asked George. 
"He is this," said Beryl, pulling off her bonnet, and running her fingers
through her hair: "and he is this," and she stroked an imaginary moustache:
"and he is this," and she caressed her soft cheek: "and he is this," and she
drawled out her words with an affected lisp: "and he is this," and George
absolutely started at the sudden insolence and assurance of her manner: "and he
is this," and she drew back like a sullen coward: "he is a fop; he is a fool;
he is a bully; he is  to be my brother-in-law," and Beryl lifted up her head
like a young war-horse scenting the battle afar off. 
"Is there no help for it? "George inquired. 
"Yes, if you can give us back the Park free from mortgages; if you can give us
horses, carriages, servants; beyond all things, money," she scoffed. "Mr Geith,
you must not think Matilda mad, when you see Richard. She has been with my
grandmother (maria elsenham) most part of her life  off and on, I mean  and she
cannot endure what we can. Short means are a wretchedness to her. She has
always been accustomed to have everything she wants. She likes gaiety. It would
be a living death to her to have to stay here always. Besides, she does not
dislike Richard as I do. She likes him. If she did not  if it were only for the
money she was marrying  I know a man (mr finch) that, were I in her place, I
would chose before Dick, twenty times over. I had rather hear his grammar than
Dick's drawl. I should prefer his stories to Dick's oaths. You will hear Mr
Richard Elsenham swearing, morning, noon, and night; but you must never mind
him, Mr Geith; no matter what he says or does."
George bit his lip; he was coming now to an understanding of what the young
lady desired  of what she was entreating at his hands. "Would it not be better
for me to go?" he asked; "and return when Mr Elsenham leaves?"
"I do not know when you would return, then," she answered; "for he lives here
nine months out of the twelve. Either here or at Wattisbridge, I mean," she
added, "which is much the same thing."
"I wonder if Mr Molozane would allow me to take the necessary papers to town? " he said. 
"Do not ask him; pray do not," she entreated. "If you knew what a comfort it is
to papa to have anybody to talk to whilst Dick is here, you would never think
of going. Besides, if you begin with my cousin as you mean to go on, you will
have no trouble; only you must not mind him, even though he should be tiresome sometimes."
He made no answer till they had paced the whole length of the walk, and were
almost at the house again. Then he said: 
"Is it to be peace at any price, Miss Beryl?"
"If you can manage it, Mr Geith, I shall be very grateful."
"Then I will try," he said; and the girl left him and ran in. Just then, out
came Miss Molozane in her riding-habit; with her coquettish hat and drooping
feather; with her light riding whip and her flowing veil. She was looking for
George to help her to mount. It was a duty he had taken kindly to; and, to say
the truth, Miss Molozane did not object to the attention in the least.
There were so many folds in the habit to be properly arranged; there was so
much nicety required about the curb; the reins were so often twisted; and the
girths needed such close inspection, that this business of mounting had come to
be quite a serious affair; a something which occupied a long time, and gave
opportunity for a considerable amount of innocent flirtation. 
On the occasion in question, as George knotted up the curb rein to the
particular length desired by the fair equestrian (Matilda Molozane); as he
patted the arched neck of the beautiful animal she rode, a thought passed
through his mind as to whether he should declare boldly to her who he was, and
try to go in and win this prize. 
But, pooh! what chance had he? What was his birth in comparison to (dick
Elsenham)'s money? what his possibilities beside Elsenham's certainties? and,
even if he had a chance, were these grapes worth climbing after? 
They were very nice to look at; but George did not know much about how they
would taste as a form of refreshment for life. He had his doubts; he was not a
young man in feelings, ideas, or even age, you remember, my reader; and though
he seemed to have taken a fresh lease of youth at the Dower House, he had still
his experience of former tendencies to fall back on, in case of need. He rather
thought Miss Molozane might not be worth the trouble; and already the fancy he
had felt was passing away from him as quickly almost as the lady was disappearing down the avenue. 
"She rides well, don't she, sir?" said a voice close beside him; and turning,
he beheld Mr Molozane's factotum, groom, gardener, coachman (Robert), standing
at his elbow. Standing with a cloth in his hand, with which cloth he was in the
habit of giving a finishing polish to any bit, buckle, or stirrup, that might
seem to stand in need of such attention. 
"I taught her, I did; when master (mr molozane) lived at the Park, I taught
her. It was me first held her on a pony. Yes, she do ride well; and that's a
nice thing she's on. Mr Elsenham, he rides well too. They make a handsome pair,
they do; but I know, if I was a gentleman, which I would choose. I'd never take
Miss Molozane whilst Miss Beryl was single: and I've known them both since they
was as high as my knee, I have."
"Does Miss Beryl never ride at all?" asked George, as much perhaps in order to
turn the conversation as from any desire for information. 
"Not often; her pony (Trot the pony) can't hold foot with the chestnut. When Mr
Elsenham is here, he sometimes gets her to try one of his horses, but Miss
Beryl is afraid now. He has served her such tricks, she is afraid of being
thrown. He says he wants to make her sure of her seat; but I know better. It is
just his jokes," muttered the old man (Robert), as he shuffled away; adding
something under his breath, which was not, George suspected, a blessing on Mr Richard Elsenham. 
"I'd like to catch the fellow playing any tricks with her," thought the
accountant, as he sat down in the library, and commenced sorting over the
papers: "I'd duck him in the nearest horse-pond."
From which expression it will be seen that the promise of peace at any price
Beryl had exacted from her new friend, was not altogether unnecessary or uncalled for. 
CHAPTER 18. QUITE AT HOME. 

When a young lady has, from the age of fifteen, been in the habit of managing
her father's house, directing his servants, and making arrangements for the
reception of his guests, her manners naturally become formed much earlier than
would have been the case under ordinary circumstances. More particularly if the
said young lady have from her earliest infancy been deprived of maternal
guidance; and freed from that constant contemplation of what is proper and
improper, which it seems the especial province of mothers to force upon the
consideration of their daughters.
 It may be rank heresy, but  (I the narrator)  hold to the belief nevertheless,
that if girls be nice at all, they are nicer when they are allowed to grow up
with their feet out of the stocks, and their figures free from backboards. It
is pleasant to see a young girl starting in life without picking her steps too
much; and young ladies who know all the pitfalls and quagmires of this wicked
world are apt to lose in simplicity what they gain in propriety. 
Mothers wise in their generation, who are acquainted with the evil, and the
sin, and the sorrow, are so anxious to keep their girls from the appearance of
evil, that they will not suffer them to be natural. They forget, God help us,
what one would think they ought to remember with thankfulness, that there is a
time, when it is as natural to the young to be frank and open as it seems to be
afterwards to the old to be masked and veiled. They will not let well alone.
They will have every word, look, action, ruled by line and plummet. They leave
nothing to impulse, because, as  (I the narrator)  have said before, they
forget there is a time when impulses are not all sinful, when it is natural to
the young to laugh and be glad as it is to the lark to sing. 
Which brings me back to what (I the narrator) meant to say at first, viz., that
George Geith thought Beryl Molozane would not have been half so pleasant a girl
had she been brought up under the eye of the stately beauty (Mrs Molozane)
whose portrait hung in the dining-room. 
He knew no mother would have suffered Beryl to wander through life at her own
sweet will in the manner Mr Molozane permitted. But still Mr Geith had very
sincere doubts as to whether a more properly trained young lady might not have
plunged headlong into errors which Beryl avoided. She was no flirt  she never
appeared embarrassed. George had seen a good deal of the world, and he had
certainly never been in a house where there seemed more union amongst the
members of the family, and from which the mystery and wickedness of ordinary
life was better excluded. Between Beryl and her father (mr molozane), indeed,
there existed such perfect sympathy, such a thorough understanding, that George
felt sure the girl would do nothing, say nothing, think nothing, which she
would hesitate to confess to her parent on the spot. Indeed, in this way Beryl
was a little provoking; because once or twice when she had talked to him, as
George in his vanity thought, confidentially, he was astonished afterwards to
find her repeating almost the same sentences in her father's presence, without
the slightest idea that she was disappointing one of her auditors. 
A girl who took this new acquaintance into her confidence, just as if she had
known him all her life; who talked before him about her slightest housekeeping
troubles; who mimicked their acquaintances, hitting off each person's oddities
with a dangerous power of mockery; whom he would meet in unexpected places
laughing till the tears ran down her cheeks; who was like a kitten, everywhere
at once; who was not a young lady, nor even a girl, but just a child in
everything save the power of keeping the house in order, and of making things
comfortable for those about her; a merry drudge; a laughing Grisel, whom the
servants loved as very few servants love any mistress now-a-days: how could a
man help liking this young thing, thinking of her, speculating about her future? 
Whom would she marry? Would she settle down into respectable matronhood, and
become quite another creature in the space of a very few years? 
Would she marry a rich man, or a poor? Would she ever become fashionable, ever
learn concealment, ever become different to what she then was? Somehow, George
found her future impossible even to picture. He could not fancy Time's hand
laid on her  always young, always laughing, he could imagine her going singing
away through life; but he could not imagine her changing  becoming cold, worldly, calculating. 
Thinking of the girl, now laughing inwardly at the recollection of some queer
speech, some expression of anger; now remembering all her unselfishness, all
her devotion, George found he was making very little progress with his
accounts, and that if he was ever to get them finished he must stay more in the
library, and not permit himself to be so frequently beguiled into leaving that
retreat for the pleasanter sitting-room of the family. 
So to work he went in earnest; toiling through the long hours of that summer
day, labouring with the windows open, and every external sight, and sound, and
perfume, tempting him out into the open air. He would not leave off even for
luncheon  the pleasant meal which had always hitherto made, such a delightful
break in the hours, when he had spent a whole day at the Dower House. 
To be sure, he did not gain much by the move, for Beryl herself brought him
what he asked for  biscuits and water; called him unsociable, an anchorite, a
hermit, and then went and gathered him fruit, which she laid on the table,
nestling amongst the leaves of the mulberry and the vine. 
Fruit is not a thing which even anchorites find it easy to resist. Fruit cannot
be eaten like biscuits, with pen in hand and eye on paper, for both which
reasons George was obliged to cease from labour and talk whilst he refreshed
himself. Then Mr Molozane came in, and settled down ostensibly to read the
paper, but really, as it seemed, to hinder George getting on with his business.
Nevertheless, he did make considerable progress, and would have worked right on
till it was time to dress for dinner, but that at about five o'clock Beryl
appeared at one of the front windows opening on to the terrace, entreating him
to cease writing before he grew into a machine. 
"How you can go on, on, hour after hour, I cannot imagine," said this steady
young woman. "How you can live out of the sunshine, away from the flowers,
puzzles me. Why, even Louey leaves her manuscripts; she is here now. Do come
out; I wish you would."
"We shan't be able to enjoy ourselves much longer," observed Louisa, who had a
wide-brimmed straw hat tied over her cap. "When once Dick comes we shall soon
have his grandmother, and then there will be a pleasant houseful."
"I always enjoy myself when Granny is here," said Beryl. "I don't know when I have greater fun."
"Because you are always mimicking her. Mr Geith, Beryl walks into the room
behind grandmamma, on tiptoe, mocking her all the time; she has been nearly
caught over and over again; indeed she was once, for Granny saw her in the glass."
"I wonder if I dare," said Beryl, looking round. "Louey, is Matilda out of the
way? Now, Mr Geith, here is Granny; " and Beryl, gathering up her dress in both
hands, straightening her back till it was as flat as a table, drawing up her
neck and stiffening her limbs, sailed up and down the terrace with all the pomp
and majesty of an ancient lady, till George, fairly overcome by the ludicrous
contrast between Beryl and the woman she was making believe to be, had to sit
down on one of the terrace seats, where he laughed as he had not laughed before for years. 
"May I inquire, sir, what is amusing you so much?" said Beryl, stopping short
in her walk, and asking the question in her grandmother's very voice. 
Then, "Oh, my gracious goodness! here is Tilly. Well, Matilda, and how are
you?" And she went sailing up to her sister, and bestowed upon her a most impressive salute. 
"Beryl, how can you? "exclaimed the beauty (Matilda Molozane). "What will Mr
Geith think? How can you be so absurd?"
"I am only moulding myself after a most desirable model," answered Beryl, still
in her cracked, old woman's voice; "and Mr Geith or any other mister may think
what he pleases. When I am in the path of duty, the remarks of the herd fail to
affect me in the least. I suppose Maria Elsenham may walk up and down her own
terrace walks without drawing down the impertinent comments of strangers."
And Beryl was off again, sweeping, rustling as she went. 
"I ought not to laugh, Miss Molozane, I know," said George, apologetically. 
"For once, Mr Geith, you have arrived at a just conclusion," remarked Beryl,
severely, as she moved past. 
"It is not possible to help laughing at Beryl," said Miss Molozane; "that is
the worst of it; and our laughing encourages her to do and say things she would
never otherwise dream of. You know, Mr Geith, she ought not to mimic her grandmother, and  "
"Once for all, young woman," interrupted Beryl, tapping her on the shoulder
with a gesture George knew must have been copied from life; "once for all,
young woman, understand that I did not choose my grandmother, and that I
maintain I have a right to mimic her if I choose. You may have chosen your
grandmother, and if so, I do not think much of your taste; let that settle the
question, there." And Beryl opened and shut her eyes once or twice
imperatively, and balanced herself on her heels, much as a parrot balances itself on its perch. 
"You will get us all into some frightful scrape," observed Miss Molozane, dolefully. 
In a moment Beryl dropped her grandmother, and was her own proper self again. 
"How shall I get you into a scrape?" she asked. "Can Granny kill us? Can she
send us to the Tower? Is she our queen? are we her subjects? Does she pay our
debts? Does she do anything but make herself as disagreeable as she knows how
when she comes down here? Get into a scrape! I wish I could keep her out of the
house by getting into a scrape, that I do!  yes, that I do!" And Miss Beryl's
cheeks flamed, while she stamped her little foot on the ground, to add emphasis to her words. 
"But would it not be wise to cease talking about her when she is not here?"
asked her sister (matilda).
 "Do you want me to go into a thousand pieces when she is here?" asked Beryl.
"Do you want me to explode with pent-up wrath and indignation? Should you like
to see me in bits  a leg here and an arm there? If so, you will tell me to hold
my peace about Granny. If I could not say I hated her, I should die; but as it
is, the thought of the fun I can make of her enable me to behave with civility
when she is in the house. You do not know how civil I am to Granny, Mr Geith;
and she can't bear my civility or me either."
"And she can't endure me," put in Louey. 
"But you wrote a poem about her," said Beryl. "She did, in deed; and as it
happened, the poem got into Matilda's desk, which she lent one day to Granny.
Matilda is excessively ready to lend things to Granny, I may remark; and the
delightful old lady looking for note-paper, she says  but, as I believe,
rummaging for secrets  came on this poem, and read it, and had us all in and
interrogated us, and sent for papa; and we had such a to-do. The poem began  
'At Kensington there dwells a dame, 
Maria Elsenham is her name, 
And -' 
"Beryl, I desire you to stop," broke in Miss Molozane. "Mr Geith, you might
tell her how wrong it is. Perhaps she will listen to what you say, though she
will not attend to me."
"Miss Beryl, I really do think," began George, but she interrupted him with  
"You need not go on. I know all you are going to say much better than you do
yourself. You were wanting to tell me about grey hairs and young heads. You
were about to say that Granny must be a lady of the highest respectability and
wealth; and that my conduct amounts to sacrilege. You were going to tell me the
fate of those children who mocked Elisha; and to inform me that people who
ridicule others are often ridiculed themselves: but it is of no use. No matter
what is right or what is wrong, I must laugh at Granny; and for anything else I don't care."
"Do you know what happened to 'don't care?'" asked Miss Molozane. 
"There have been so many 'don't cares,'" retorted Beryl. "There was one ran
away to sea and was drowned; one fell among savages; one was eaten by a lion on
the coast of Africa (I would tell you what part of the coast, only I don't know
that myself); and another happened to have a sister called Matilda. Her fate
was the hardest of all, I think  but I hear horse's hoofs; I hear Sultan
trotting up the drive; and I know Dick is coming, and I am not dressed to
receive him. There, Miss Matty, that is your fault there." And Beryl pulled a grimace. 
"Do you know whether papa is in the house?" asked Miss Molozane, who coloured
perceptibly at Beryl's intelligence. 
"I don't know, and I don't care," murmured that young lady. "Dick will be sure
to find us out. I am not going to meet him, Tilly, if that is what you are
looking so pitiful about. If you think it necessary for anyone to ask him to
make himself at home, you can go and do so yourself."
"We had better go in," suggested Miss Molozane. 
"Not at all; I am very comfortable where I am. Ah! here he comes;" and at that
instant George heard the library door flung open; then an audible "Where the
devil are they all!" which sentence was immediately followed by the speaker
(dick elsenham), who stepped out on to the terrace and greeted his cousins with  
"Well, girls, how are you?"
"We feel a great deal better now you are come," answered Beryl, demurely; and
she held out her hand to the young man, who evidently considered that his
relationship justified a warmer salutation, which he might have exacted, but
that at the moment he caught sight of Mr Geith. 
There was a supercilious lifting of his eyebrows, a contemptuous measuring of
the stranger's social standing, an unqualified stare of amazement; and then a
look towards Beryl which said as plainly as a look could, "Who the deuce is
this fellow, and what is he doing here?"
"Mr Elsenham, Mr Geith," Beryl answered; and thereupon the two gentlemen bowed. 
"You must have found it very warm riding this afternoon," remarked the accountant. 
"Infernally," was the reply; and Mr Elsenham took off his hat as he spoke. 
"You are covered with dust," said Louisa, with the air of a person who
considered she had made an original observation. 
"These cursed roads are always dusty," Mr Elsenham graciously answered. 
"Most roads are so when they are not muddy," opined Louisa, at which speech the young man laughed. 
"Have you written any proverbs since I saw you last, Solomon (louisa)?" he
asked. "No! Nor finished ten tragedies; nor made a better Paradise than
Milton's? You lazy little wretch! I'll see that you work whilst I am here. And
when are you going to get rid of that cap? I give you fair notice I shall set
it on fire;" and he was making a step towards the girl, when Beryl interrupted him. 
"I won't have it, Richard," she said. "You shall not torment Louey. Let her cap
alone, and her too."
"It is such an outrageous thing," he observed.
"Nobody asks you to wear it," she retorted; and then the idea of Dick in a cap
so overcame her, that Miss Molozane felt constrained to interfere and rebuke
her sister (beryl) severely. 
"Know this part of the country well?" asked Mr Elsenham, turning towards Mr Geith. 
"No, it is quite strange to me; and I am not likely to know it much better, for
I am only here on business."
"Humph," grunted Mr Elsenham, and he took a comprehensive glance round the
party; after which he said, "that business must be a d-d bore, though, thank
the Lord, he knew nothing about it save by report."
"It is lucky for you that your grandfather (grandfather elsenham) had a closer
acquaintance with it," remarked Miss Beryl. 
"It is well there are some people in the world who will work like galley
slaves," answered Mr Elsenham. "I'll be hanged if I would."
"Would you rather starve, Dick?" asked Louisa; where upon the young man told
her to "shut up;" and inquired if Mr Geith would have "a weed."
The politeness being declined, Mr Elsenham lit a cigar for himself, and asked where his uncle was. 
"He is gone to the Park, I think," answered Miss Molozane; upon receiving which
information, her cousin (dick elsenham) at once turned to Beryl with  
"And how is Mr Werne?"
"So far as I know, he is quite well," she replied. 
"And how far do you know?" he asked, taking the cigar out of his mouth, and
putting the question in a tone which George by no means approved. 
"The last time papa was at the Park, he made no mention of Mr Werne being ill.
As you seem particularly interested about him, however, perhaps I had better
send Robert up to inquire."
 "I'm not interested in the fellow, hang him! I don't care a d-d sixpence
whether he is ill or well. Have you seen this Withefell saint, Mr Geith? And
what do you think of him?"
"I have not seen him," answered the accountant, "nor heard of him, save from Miss Louisa."
"You should get Beryl at the bellows then. Who is wise, holy, good? Mr Werne.
Who is well-informed, well-bred, well travelled? Mr Werne. Who never swears,
never is out of temper, never d-s his servants? Mr Werne. And, if I may add so
much on my own account, who is the most cursed hypocrite, the most confounded
upstart, the most intolerable prig? Mr Werne!"
"It would be a blessing for us if you were only like him, instead of being what
you are  a slanderer of a good man, before whom you dare not say the things you
say before us!" panted Beryl.
 "Ah! Mr Geith, that is all very fine, but don't let it impose upon you. Beryl
abuses me in company, but you cannot imagine all the nice compliments she pays
when we are alone;" and Mr Elsenham puffed a cloud of smoke out of his mouth,
and watched it curling up into the silent air. 
If ever Mr Geith felt a desire to kick a man, it was at that moment. He would
have liked to thrash the fellow, and thrust him neck-and-crop off the premises.
He longed to pick a quarrel with him, to get an opportunity of telling this new
comer what he thought of him, his manners, and his speeches; but he luckily
remembered his promise to Beryl, and biting back his words, kept peace.
 "You are fortunate," he said; "with many relatives the process is inverted."
"Do not attend to what 'Dick says, Mr Geith," interposed Louisa; "he and Beryl
quarrel more when there is nobody by than they ever do before people."
"That's all you know about it, Solomon (Louisa),"remarked Mr Elsenham: "Beryl
and I have been friends and cronies ever since she wore a short white frock and
a sky-blue sash. We robbed birds' nests together, pelted the ducks, laid trains
of gunpowder under the cats, chased the fowls, and frightened old women. We
quarrelled then. I have a vivid memory of long scratches on my face, for
scratching and pulling my hair was Beryl's way of showing fight. We quarrel
still; but we were good friends then, and we are good friends now, are we not, coz?"
"Capital at a distance," answered Beryl, who was by this time almost at a white heat. 
"And near at hand, too, ma mignonne," retorted Mr Elsenham. "What a heavenly
day this is, to be sure. Have you had Zillah out, Matilda?"
"Yes, I had a long ride," answered the beauty (Matilda Molozane); "but I must
try for the future to be either earlier or later. The evenings would be the
pleasantest time, I think."
"I can assure you they would for me," observed Mr Elsenham. "Never could see
the fun of getting up early in the morning: never could see the beauty of
sunrise and dew drops; and all the rest of the rubbish: "and Mr Elsenham
knocked the ash off his cigar, and waited to hear if anyone would contradict him. 
No person did, however; George had made up his mind not to argue with Miss
Molozane's fianc (dick elsenham) if he could help it. He saw he was an
individual who the more he was contradicted sought all the more occasion for
argument; and the accountant was determined to keep his promise and his temper, if he could. 
Which forbearance brought its own reward, for Mr Elsenham took an opportunity
of remarking to Miss Molozane that for a tradesman Geith seemed a devilishly
decent sort of fellow; appears a confounded deal too much at home with you all,
though. Wonder at my uncle (mr molozane) allowing it. Has he been making love to Beryl? 
"Making love to Beryl!" and Miss Molozane opened her fine eyes in astonishment. 
"D- it, you did not think I should imagine he had been making love to you,"
retorted her betrothed. "I don't see any symptom of softness, remember; but
still I thought I'd ask the question."
"How could such an idea enter your head?" asked Miss Molozane. 
"The man (george geith) is well enough for his station; but he is only an
accountant; he is only here on business."
"He seems to find his business remarkably pleasant," said her cousin (dick
elsenham), and who could say but that his idea was correct? 
"One cannot have a person in the house and not speak a civil sentence to him,"
observed Miss Molozane. 
"Did I say you could? but that is different. Here I find you all gathered
together on the terrace, talking, laughing, making yourselves as agreeable as
may be, to a man about whom my uncle (mr molozane) knows nothing, except that
he can add up a column and cast accounts."
"He had been hard at work all day," Matilda explained. "I think Beryl coaxed
him out. She never likes to see any one working too much."
"Beryl again!" muttered Mr Elsenham; "Beryl will get herself into a mess some
of these days, if she does not take care."
"I shall begin to think you are in love with Beryl," said Miss Molozane, with
an angry flush. "You seem to think no soul should come to the house but
yourself. Last time it was Mr Werne; now Mr Geith. Pray, let Beryl manage her
own affairs; she is quite competent to keep herself safe without your help. You
ought to have more consideration for her than even to mention her name in the
same breath with Mr Geith; who may be a respectable married man for anything we
know to the contrary."
"Stuff!" exclaimed Mr Elsenham. "The fellow is not married. He knows a precious
deal too well how to make himself comfortable amongst single women to have any tie at home."
"That may be your opinion," said Miss Molozane; "but Beryl has always declared
he was either married or a widower."
"Who was either married or widower?" asked Beryl, entering the drawing-room
with Louisa at the moment. 
"Mr Geith. Richard says he is sure he is nothing of the kind."
"Shall we ask him, Dick?" inquired Beryl. "Louisa could easily inquire how his
wife supported his long absence. Could not you, Louey?"
"Which of you, should I say, wanted to know?" demanded that young lady. 
"You could say we were all dying to become acquainted with (Mrs Geith
generic),"suggested Mr Elsenham;" and that it would add greatly to the pleasure
we are deriving from her husband's society, if she could be induced to come to Withefell with him."
"You might add also, Louey," said Beryl, "that Dick is wearied of our society,
and wants something fresh."
"He stops at the 'Stag,' I suppose?" went on Mr Elsenham. 
"You could tell him there is capital accommodation there for families, church
close at hand, doctor over the way."
"He does not stop at the 'Stag' at all! "exclaimed Louisa. "He stops here."
"In this house?" demanded Mr Elsenham. "Do you mean he eats, drinks, sleeps here?"
"To be sure he does," answered Louisa. "Where else would you have had him eat, drink, and sleep? "
"Well, I'll be hanged if ever I heard anything like this!" cried Mr Elsenham.
"My uncle (mr molozane) must be stark staring mad. He had better send round the
crier and gather in all the tramps in the country. I must speak to him about it."
"If you want to do so," said Beryl, "you'll find him in the library with Mr Geith."
"Oh! I am not going to say anything before the man. What in the name of Heaven,
Beryl, do you think I am made of, to imagine I'd insult him in that way?"
"I had not the slightest idea what Mr Richard Elsenham's exquisite tact might
suggest as the proper course," retorted Beryl, with a curtsy. "But, see! there
is papa (mr molozane) in the garden; you had better go to him and get it over at once."
Taking the hint, Mr Elsenham walked out to his uncle, and began: 
"About Mr Geith"
"Well, Richard?"
"The girls tell me he is staying here at present." 
"What then?"
"Do you think it well, considering his station in life?"
"Sir!" and Mr Molozane faced round on his nephew. 
"I only meant to say," went on Mr Elsenham. 
"Say nothing," interrupted his uncle; "that is, say nothing, if you intended
for a moment to dictate whom I should or should not ask into this house. If I
like to invite a groom to dinner, it is no business of yours. It is optional
with you whether you choose to meet him or not."
"But, considering my engagement to Matilda?" suggested Mr Elsenham. 
"That engagement was none of my seeking," answered his uncle; "and if it had
been, it would still give you no right to meddle in my concerns."
"But surely, sir, I may give an opinion concerning the acquaintances of my future wife?"
"You shall not express any opinion to me concerning the acquaintances I
introduce to my daughter (matilda)," thundered Mr Molozane; "so long as she
lives under my roof she shall be civil to my guests; and so long as you come
here I shall look for a similar courtesy to them from you."
"I have certainly no intention of being rude to Mr Geith," answered the young
man (dick elsenham), meekly; "and when I spoke I was not thinking so much about
Matilda as about Beryl."
"Which of my daughters is it, Mr Elsenham, that you are going to do me the
honour of marrying?" asked Mr Molozane. "If it be Matilda, may I request that
you will cease troubling yourself in any way about Beryl's prospects? From the
curates at Wattisbridge up, you have always fancied every man you have met here
wanted to marry Beryl; and once for all, Richard, I tell you I have had enough
of this. Do not compel me to express my wishes on this subject again."
"But may I not ask you, sir, whether you know anything about Mr Geith? About his "
"That is the way to Wattisbridge," said Mr Molozane, cutting across his
nephew's speech; "and there is the way into my house. If you are going to
meddle in my affairs, I must request you to take the former; but if you decide
on remaining here, you can only remain on the terms I have mentioned. Mr Geith
is staying in my house as my guest, because it suits us both that he should do
so; and unless you intend to treat him as your equal in all respects, it will
be well for you to return to London."
"You shall have no reason to complain of any want of civility on my part," said
Mr Elsenham, sullenly. "I like the fellow well enough; I only thought it right
to tell you my opinion."
"Having told it to me, you had better let the subject drop," answered Mr
Molozane; and the two went in to dinner. 

CHAPTER 19. HAPPINESS. 

Taking it as a whole, Mr Geith did not find the new comer interfered, in the
slightest degree, with his comfort or convenience. Nay, rather, as the days
went by, it seemed as though Mr Elsenham's presence made the former social
freedom greater, and tended to establish the accountant more firmly in his host's favour. 
Owing to some curious perversity, Mr Elsenham took kindly to the man he had
wanted to get out of the house. For a couple of evenings he had been cool, not
to say sulky; but after that, satisfied perhaps that George neither meant nor
was doing any harm, he was graciously pleased to unbend towards him, and evince
such courtesy as he could. 
If such a thing were possible, there was more life about the Dower House after
his arrival than before; what with Beryl and Mr Elsenham quarrelling, Beryl and
Mr Elsenham disputing, Beryl and Mr Elsenham laughing, the place was never
quiet. From first thing in the morning till all separated for the night, the
house was never still. When he left for St Margaret's, when he returned from
town, George heard the same pleasant clatter of tongues; without which he found
his London office silent and lonely. 
Light-hearted youth! Shall we not bare our heads, and thank God for your
cheerful tones, your sunny smiles, your happy carelessness? Shall those who
have passed through the heat and burden of weary days, not thank the Almighty
for suffering the cool breath of morning to fan their cheeks once more? Shall
the old not be grateful for having the burden of years pushed aside for a
moment by young and eager hands? Shall they not gaze gladly over the once
familiar prospects, even though their eyes be wet with tears; and if, in the
young, God be pleased to give them back their own far-away youth for a season,
shall they not bask in the sunshine, and listen to the pleasant joy -bells,
murmuring the while a trembling thanksgiving? 
My readers, pardon me if (I the narrator) linger over this summer-time too
lovingly; over those hours which were full of such a delicious sweetness, that
George Geith might have been pardoned had he wished to die then, and escape in
the midst of his joy from the chance of the dark and evil days to come. 
There are some landscapes from which it is hard to turn our eyes: some lands
from which we are loath to turn our feet: some places where we have been so
unutterably happy, that they seem to float in the sunbeams for ever after. Like
the hills lying under the blue summer sky, like the sea spreading in sunlit
glory, like fields and trees bathed in the living beauty of morning, was that
time to the man whose youth was past. 
Had he ever known youth? he asked himself, as he drank in the wine of that, to
him, strange vintage. Had he ever been young, ever been gay, ever been happy,
like those people by whom he was surrounded? 
Light-hearted youth! the stern, grave man yielded to the charm of your spell;
you laid your wand upon him, and behold! the years vanished, and you gave him
back the days gone by. 
Light-hearted youth! How shall (I the narrator) chant your praises: by what
means can I echo the sound of your glad voices: how may I tell of the smiles,
discourse of the laughter; shout to deaf ears the magic influence you possess;
persuade those who frown at your gaiety how good a thing it is for us to be
near the young, and to join in their mirth? 
Shall we put old heads on young shoulders? God forbid! Shall we tell of the
night to day, or speak of winter to the spring? Rather, oh friends! shall we
not think in the darkness, of the light, in the snow of the sunshine, and
retrace our own steps, sooner than drag the young from the happy fields, where
they wander among the flowers, to the dusty roads and the barren highways along
which manhood plods its way? 
This was a glad time to George Geith, one in which he lived so fully in the
present, that future and past seemed alike indifferent. Such hours as those,
bathed in sunshine, steeped in honey, men who have passed their first youth
know how to value, because they know, also, how seldom they may return.
Holidays may come, summer after summer, to the schoolboy; but holidays to be
enjoyed are rare in after life. For this reason manhood gathers all flowers of
happiness that come in its way with such eagerness of pleasure as can only
coexist with pain. It has no spare buds to fling away, no such profusion of
garlands that it can afford to leave one to wither. The simplest wild flower is
to it as the costliest exotic; and there are no neglected roses, no drooping
lilies, no withering leaves strewed carelessly along the path which has been
trodden by the feet of middle age.
I do not know how it is that there are some middle-aged people who do not care
for morning, or spring, or youth, or happy voices, or ringing laughter; who
regard gaiety as an insult, merriment as a weakness, happiness as a frivolity;
who care for nothing in their daily life but food and raiment, and dreary
dinner-parties, and what they are pleased to call sensible conversation; who
think there is no wisdom in smiles superior to their own sedateness; who
believe that the Lord Almighty, who made the flowers to bloom and the trees to
blossom, and the birds to sing, did not intend likewise the young to be gay and
happy of necessity, and the old to be gay and happy likewise, if they found it
possible to float with light hearts over the waves of the ocean of life. 
George Geith, at any rate, was not one of those who would neither rejoice nor let others do so. 
He had suffered, he had worked, he had led a lonely, loveless life; but yet,
when these children with whom he was thrown piped unto him, he was ready to
dance to their strains. 
Happy holidays! Would (I the narrator) had space to linger over those sunlit
hours! Spite of the frowns of readers, of the rebukes of critics, I could bask
in that summer glory for ever, and chronicle the events of each passing hour
with the loving garrulity of age. Happy holidays!  in which, though it might be
the school-children were not all good, all innocent, they were yet all happy
and noisy as crickets; when one. would have imagined there was no such thing on
earth as care, no such shadow as ruin hanging over the Dower House; when it was
idleness, jesting, laughing, walking, riding, all the day long; when even
George's reluctant labour seemed industry itself when compared with the labours
of those about him. 
Never, since he began business, had a summer brought so little work with it to him.
 Everybody seemed to be out of town  abroad, at the seaside, in the Highlands,
at Killarney, or the English lakes. Scarcely any books needed balancing; there
were no schedules to prepare; but few columns to add up, and accordingly it
came to pass that after a time the accountant did not go often into town, but
remained much at Withefell, arranging Mr Molozane's affairs.
How he managed to get those affairs into order, it would be difficult to tell;
for it was against the wishes of the whole family that he did any work at all. 
"What a pity it seems for you, Mr Geith, not to be enjoying this lovely
weather," Mr Molozane would say. 
"Ah! do come out," Beryl would plead, laying her hand on his papers, and taking
possession of his ink. 
"We are going away for a long walk," Mr Elsenham would observe; "you had better
come, too, before your feet grow to the carpet;" whilst Louisa was more
peremptory still, and would as coolly take up her position in the library, and
announce her intention of giving Mr Geith "no rest 'till he left off work, as
if it were in the right and natural course of things for a business man to be
tormented to death by a miss in her earliest teens. 
"I shall certainly have to lock you out, Miss Loo," George would threaten. 
"I should come in through the window," retorted Louisa, from her favourite
perch, which was one of the steps of the book-ladder. 
"I must then fasten the window," remarked George. 
"And draw down the blinds, and close the shutters, and get in candles,"
suggested Louisa. "Short of that you will not keep me away. I will have you
out: you shall not sit here the whole day long, write writing, add adding, till
you drop down dead."
"But you write?" said the accountant. 
"I write for pleasure; my writing is very different from yours," answered Louisa, with dignity. 
"So it may be; but still I am able to make my business my pleasure too."
"Then it is not good for you to have so much pleasure," said the young lady;
"and you shall come out into the garden. I cannot imagine what flowers, and
fields, and trees, were given to people for, if they never look at them."
"Some people look at them, if others do not," George answered; "just as some
people see the Pyramids, whilst others never so much as hear of them."
"That is no reason why you should mope in the house all day: do come out: if
you don't come fast they will all be gone; for Beryl is going to ride to-day."
"What is she going to ride?" asked George. 
"Her own pony (Trot the pony). What else should she ride? Perhaps you would
like to see her mounted on the top of Dick's Giraffe."
"Indeed I should like to see no such thing," answered the accountant, as he
dipped his pen in the ink, and prepared to commence work again. 
"Are you not coming after all?" demanded Louisa, descending from her perch, and
looking at him as though he had done her some injury. 
"I shall come to see them start, if you allow me," he answered; "but I must
finish what I am about now."
"You are a monster, and I cannot bear you," said Louisa. 
"I have Scripture on my side, at any rate; and I must try to support your displeasure."
"Scripture  what Scripture?" demanded the young lady. 
"I shall not tell you," answered George; "but if you can find out for yourself,
I will say whether your guess be right."
"But  do  do  do!" pleaded Louisa. 
"Surely you would not have me tell untruths? and I said you must guess first,"
he replied. "And now, Miss Loo, do run away; I cannot get on with a thing whilst you are here."
"But I may come back when I guess."
"If you do not come back too often," he answered; and Louisa left him. 
During the next hour she was in about every ten minutes, proving wrong each
time; until at last, after a longer absence than usual, he heard through the
open window an argument on the terrace outside. 
"You shall not."
"I shall."
"I won't be friends with you, Loo."
"Then don't be friends."
"But it is so naughty and unkind of you."
"Naughty, indeed! Who put it into my head? I had forgotten till just now; and I
am so glad you reminded me of it."
"I declare, Loo, I shall tell papa."
"Do, and I shall tell papa (mr molozane) too; but I shall first ask Mr Geith.
Beryl says, Mr Geith," she continued, putting her head in at the window, "that
your text is, 'Resist the devil, and he will flee from you.'"
"Never mind her, Mr Geith," put in Beryl; "she is talking nonsense."'
"Never mind Beryl, Mr Geith," said Louisa, "she is telling fibs."
"I shall box your ears, miss," threatened her sister. 
"And, Mr Geith, do come here for a minute," entreated Louisa. 
"Now, Louey, you might for once do what I ask you," interposed Beryl. 
"Dick and Beryl want to know," went on this enfant terrible, "how Mrs"
"I'll tell you what we said, Mr Geith," broke in Beryl: "Dick thought you were
not married, and I thought you were; and then I remarked that if he liked,
Louey might ask which of us was right. But I never meant her to tell you; and
she knew I did not;" and Beryl looked as if she were going to cry about the matter. 
"They were arguing again this afternoon," explained Miss Louisa; who, being
somewhat curious on the subject herself, was determined to have her say out. 
"Dick said 'he'd be _,'" and Louisa nodded her head significantly, "'if you
were married at all,' and Beryl said she was sure you were, that she had never
been mistaken yet: did not you, Beryl?"
But Beryl was gone. Failing to stop her sister's tongue, the next best thing
seemed to be to get out of the way of hearing it. 
"Dick laid five to one," ran on Miss Louisa, "and Beryl bet a pair of gloves
and her riding-whip, to show she was in earnest. So, which wins, Mr Geith? I am
to have a sovereign out of the five if Dick be wrong."
But Mr Geith would not say which was right. "You would be too wise if you knew
everything, Miss Louisa," he observed. 
"But I should like so much to know," she urged. 
"And I should like so much not to tell you," he answered, "that I must hold my
peace; besides, it would be such a pity for your sister to lose her whip."
"Then you are not married?"
"Or for Mr Elsenham to have to pay five pounds," went on George, coolly. 
"They could not both lose, you know," said Louisa. 
"Yes, they might," answered the accountant. 
"How might they?"
"If I were divorced," he answered. 
"Oh, my goodness gracious!" exclaimed the young lady; "I believe you are."
And she rushed straight off to Mr Elsenham, with "You've lost, Dick  he's divorced!"
"He's your grandmother!" retorted Mr Elsenham. 
"He is not; I wish he were, instead of the one I have got (maria elsenham)! But
you've lost. Give me my sovereign."
"Who said I had lost?"
"He said you would both lose if he were divorced."
"Ifs might fly if they had wings," remarked Mr Elsenham. "Now, Loo, be off, and
tell those sisters of yours (beryl)(matilda)to make haste. The horses (trot the
pony) (zillah) will be round in five minutes."
"But about my sovereign, Dick?"
"Earn it, young lady," was Mr Elsenham's advice; and he forthwith lit a cigar
and walked away, smoking, as usual, down the avenue. 
By the time the ladies (matilda) (beryl) were ready, George came round to the
lawn to see them start. 
"(Trot the pony) is not much of a steed, is he?" asked Beryl, patting her
pony's neck, a civility which (Trot the pony) returned by taking her habit in
his mouth and making believe to chew it. "I am always miles behind everybody."
"Because you ride so slowly," said her cousin. 
"Because you ride so fast," said Beryl. 
"What a deal of good a gallop would do you, Geith!" remarked Mr Elsenham. 
"What a pity you do not ride!"  George could not help smiling at the
observation; and it was such a strange smile in which he indulged, as he
stooped and pretended to be adjusting Trot's bridle, that Miss Molozane said: 
"Perhaps Mr Geith does ride. I believe none of us have ever asked him."
"Faith! perhaps he does, though it's not much of a City accomplishment. Do you
ride?" And Mr Elsenham turned with his foot in the stirrup, to ask the question. 
"Yes, I have ridden," answered the accountant. 
"Any brute like that?" inquired Mr Elsenham, pointing to the Giraffe, which it
was about to be the groom (Robert)'s privilege to mount. 
"No, not much like that; for an uglier animal I never saw."
"He is a rare fellow to go, for all that. Should you be afraid to venture your neck on him?"
"Not in the least."
"If you are sure of that, come with us. Take care how you get up. He's a devil to kick."
"Let him kick," was Mr Geith's philosophic answer. 
"Have you ridden in the circus, old fellow?" asked Mr Elsenham, when he saw the
accountant fairly settled in his saddle. 
"I have ridden across country, which I suppose is something the same thing," retorted Mr Geith. 
"After the hounds? "
"Do people generally go across the country before them?" inquired George. 
"Hang it, no. I meant, have you been in the habit of hunting?"
"I was, years ago."
"Where? In the neighbourhood of London?"
"No; in Bedfordshire."
"Is that your county?"
"It is not the county where I was born; but it is the county where most of the Geiths have lived."
"You don't mean that you are one of the Geiths of Snareham?"
"Would there be anything wonderful if I did?"
"Are you any relation to Sir Mark Geith?"
"Only his cousin."
"Good Lord!" ejaculated Mr Richard Elsenham.  "How does it happen that you are an accountant? "
"If I were inclined to be polite, I might ask how it happens you are a
gentleman at large," asked Mr Geith, with a slight sneer. 
"You deserved that, Dick," said Beryl. "What affair is it of yours what Mr Geith chooses to be?"
"It is, perhaps, not my choice, but my necessity, Miss Beryl," observed George,
reining in his horse (giraffe) beside her; to which the young lady replied in a
low tone, something about her cousin being always inquisitive and impertinent. 
"I shall come to you, Beryl, when I want a thoroughly good character," said Mr
Elsenham, who caught some part of her sentence.  "If I have offended Mr Geith,
I am sorry for it. Would you wish me to say anything more than that?"
"There was no reason why you should have said so much," answered George,
laughing. "I am not ashamed of being connected with the Geiths of Snareham; and
I am still less ashamed of being an accountant in the City."
Whereupon Mr Elsenham was so good as to assure their new companion that he
meant for the future to forget all about the City, and his business too. 
"But I cannot agree to that, Mr Elsenham," answered the accountant. "The City
has given me a home; my business has provided bread and cheese; and I am not
going to follow the example of the citizens, and despise that which has kept me
off the parish. Business is a capital invention, and the City is a place where
any man with courage and industry may push his way. The City is the proper land
for younger sons to emigrate to, if younger sons could but be induced to think so."
"Bravo, Mr Geith," said Beryl, clapping her hands; which demonstration caused
the Giraffe to plunge frantically: and induced Mr Elsenham to remark they had
better get on a little faster, and breathe the horses before they became troublesome. 
CHAPTER 20. BERYL'S ADMIRER. 

It was not long before Beryl's pony (Trot the pony) fell far behind the rest;
so far, indeed, that whenever Mr Geith could pull in his horse (giraffe), he
turned and rode back some distance to meet her.
 "Never mind me," said Beryl; "go on with the others, and I will overtake you
when you commence walking."
"As if it were probable I should leave you," answered George; and the pair rode
on in silence for a minute or two. 
Then, "I like," began Beryl, "to hear a man stand up for his business, as much
as I like to hear people stand up for their country. I think if I had to earn
my bread, I should feel the dignity of labour so strongly that I should quarrel
with anyone who disputed it. We have some neighbours who talk about the City as
if it were a den of thieves; and who, although every sixpence they have was
made in trade, 'could not think of putting their sons to business.' They were
happy to have had fathers who were not ashamed of trade. But for that, they
would now be poor enough."
"They merely express, however, the general prejudice of society," remarked George. 
"Do you not think they create that prejudice for themselves?" she asked. "The
outer world can know nothing of business, except what it hears from the
initiated; and if the initiated declare it is all roguery and vulgarity from
chapter to chapter, what is society to say? Remember, Mr Geith, I believe in
business, and I only wish I were a man, to show what business could do for
Molozane Park. I have thought a great deal about business lately, and I see
that if trade were not always providing money for the aristocracy, the
aristocracy would soon go down to the lowest depths of poverty. Look at the
Park, Mr Geith: if we were there now, we could do nothing for want of money;
but as it is, Mr Werne keeps up a fine establishment; gives plenty of
employment; is good to the poor; is hospitable to his neighbours. I am sure,"
went on the poor little girl, with a tremor in her voice, "it was a good day
for Withefell when the Molozanes left the Park, for we were not rich enough to
do anything for any one  not even for ourselves."
"Mr Werne, then, is very rich?" asked George. 
"Nobody knows how rich," answered Beryl, with a sad look in her brown eyes as
she spoke. "He is a chemist, and has made  oh! such a fortune! His father (mr
werne's father) was a chemist also, but he never got on like his son. He could
buy the Park tomorrow, papa (mr molozane)  says, and never miss the purchase-money."
"And he is as good as he is rich?" suggested George. 
"I could not tell you, Mr Geith, how good a man he is," said Beryl, earnestly.
"Dick laughs at me for praising him, but I cannot help saying what I think 
that he is better than any one I ever knew. I do not know how it happens that
you have never met him, for he comes often to see papa. That is the principal
entrance to the Park," she added; "you have not seen it before, and I declare
there is Mr Werne himself!"
Beryl was right: there was Mr Werne. Mounted on a strong, iron-grey horse, he
was coming slowly down the long avenue bordered with elms; but at sight of
Beryl and her companion he quickened his pace. 
"We will wait for him," said Beryl, with the utmost composure; and what could
her companion do but follow suit?  nothing loth, to say truth, for he was
curious to see Mr Werne, and he had now a capital opportunity of doing so. 
A light-haired, fair-complexioned, grey-eyed, middle-aged man, to whom Beryl
was, George Geith saw at a glance, sun, moon, stars, and planets; whilst, as
for Beryl herself, the accountant might as soon have tried to understand the
sphinx as the face of the young lady by his side. 
Did she care for this millionnaire, or not? Would she marry for an
establishment? Did she understand what all that devotion of manner, all that
repressed eagerness meant? George began to ask himself these and fifty other
similar questions almost before the first greetings were over  before he
himself had been introduced to Beryl's friend. 
Was the little lady, when all was said and done, hankering, like other people,
after loaves and fishes? after the flesh-pots of Egypt? after the gold, and the
station, and the influence which confer advantages not to be despised? That she
cared for Mr Werne, George did not credit; but he was commencing almost to
believe that Beryl was not blind to her own interests; and he thought, for a
moment, that perhaps she was exalting this man into a god, so as afterwards to
excuse her own worship of him. Poor Beryl! the day came when this old,
uncharitable man of the world knew her better; but that day was not the one on
which he rode along the Hertfordshire lanes, listening to all Mr Werne had to say to her. 
Very much in the way Mr Geith felt, and he wished in his heart that one of the
trio was absent  either himself or Mr Werne; but as it was, so it was; and he
heard the decorous talk about the poor and their wants, their sickness, their
improvidence, their necessities, which had been so familiar to him once, in the
days when he was professing to serve another God than Mammon. 
In the one time, as at the other, George found the talk detestable. There are
three topics which, to a man of his nature, must always, (I the narrator) 
suspect, prove wearisome, viz., servants, children, and the poor. He never
could understand the interest people took in any of them; and for the moment he
felt inclined to hold with Mr Elsenham, that the Withefell saint was an awful
humbug, and a tremendous bore. 
Beryl's propriety likewise was something dreadful to contemplate. Not once, but
fifty times, George had heard her making fun of the very men and women in whose
behalf she was now so eloquent. She had been good enough to imitate old Mrs
Mears' whine, Job Darth's stammer, Mrs O'Rourke's brogue, and Mary Hurst's
sniffle. She had gone over every soul in the village, seriatim, mocking their
peculiarities, hitting off their characteristics, baring their falseness, and
yet still here she was, riding along with as demure a face as though she had
never ridiculed any living being. 
"And about Beames' rent, Mr Werne? I believe he is now in constant work?"
"I can't stand this any longer," thought George, and thought it with the
addition of an oath; and while Mr Werne was answering, he struck his horse
(giraffe) stealthily yet sharply, causing him to dance and curvet across the road. 
"You have not a very quiet animal, sir," observed Mr Werne; in answer to which
Mr Geith muttered some almost inaudible reply, whilst he struck the horse
again, reining him in tightly as he did so. 
Straight up went the brute (giraffe) on his hind legs, and forthwith Beryl
became alarmed, and cried out: 
"You will be killed! pray don't strike him; you don't know what horrid tempers
all Dick's horses have."
"I know this is rather an awkward animal (giraffe) to manage at a walk,"
answered George, not without a certain satisfaction; whilst Mr Werne said,
courteously, he thought in the stables at the Park he might surely find
something to suit him better, and that he hoped he would come and take his choice. 
Just then Mr Elsenham and Miss Molozane appeared in sight. "They had come
back," they said, "to see if Beryl and Mr Geith were safe;" and they shook
hands with Mr Werne, and remarked on the heat of the weather, and the beauty of
the day, with most praiseworthy politeness. 
By-and-by, Mr Elsenham and George dropped behind, Mr Werne escorting the ladies in front. 
"So you have, been favoured with a sight at last," remarked the younger man,
when they were out of earshot. 
"What do you think of Beryl's saint?"
"That he is like all other saints," was the reply. 
"In what respect?"
"Too meek  too good too much like an old woman," said George, as he touched his
horse with his whip again. 
"Now I tell you what, my good fellow," cried Mr Elsenham, "if you try that,
you'll come to grief to a certainty; Giraffe won't stand it."
"Giraffe must stand it," was the reply. 
"But he rears."
"I know he does; he was rearing a few minutes since."
"And why can't you let him alone? "
"Because I am sick of being quiet; because I am tired to death of this pace;
because I hate talk about the poor."
"Hear, hear!" said Mr Elsenham, approvingly.
"Why, in Heaven's name," went on the accountant, "can't they get their wine and
their jelly, and their physic and their clothing, and their alms, without such
an everlasting clatter about their wants? I'm sure I should think it trouble
enough to see to their necessities, without having to talk them over afterwards."
"D- the poor! "said Mr Elsenham with great gusto. "But, after all, the poor are
sometimes only made a pretext, as in the present case. Over tracts, flannel
petticoats, and beef tea, Beryl and Mr Werne carry on their courtship. If ever
she marries that Pope, she and I are quits, for there will be no fun and no
life in her afterwards."
"Miss Beryl might do worse, nevertheless," remarked George, sententiously. 
"That's the deuce of the matter. If the man were poor, one might find something
to say; but as it is, so it is."
"Gold wins the day all the world over," remarked the accountant; and he thought
of the man beside him (dick elsenham) whom Matilda was going to marry, and of
the man riding in front (mr werne) with whom Beryl was coquetting. 
For what else could he call it? If she liked him, why did she not encourage
him? If she did not like him, why did she praise him up to the skies, and
listen to him so demurely? 
He was trying to solve what we have all tried vainly to solve sometime or
another, the enigma of a neighbour's heart. He was judging of its works from
the way he saw the hands moving. He thought he knew all the wheels within
wheels that were spinning round in the girl's mind, and accordingly, because he
would not acknowledge that man knows nothing of man, he judged, as we all judge
when we condemn others be sides ourselves, wrongly. 
In the midst of our sin, in the midst of our folly, in the midst of our
weakness, there is one consolation of which the preacher never tells us,
namely, that it is not with man, but with God, the last sentence rests. How
would it fare with us if our neighbour had to dispose of our souls? if he had
to tell our motives, recount our deeds?  (I the narrator)  think about this
when I hear man's verdict  man's righteous verdict according to man's light  on
the thief and the murderer. I think that another volume, which is to us a
sealed book, has been read up on high, and that the other side, over which, it
may be, angels' tears have fallen, has been pleaded before that only tribunal
where all man's misery, his temptations, his antecedents, his weaknesses, his
terror, his blindness, his feeble strivings after light, are fully understood. 
Is this talk about a girl and her lover too grave? (I the narrator) believe
not. There is not a relation of life in which we are not given to judging over-righteously. 
There is nothing which offends humanity so much as the loneliness of its fellow
human being. Though we lock our own doors, dry our own tears, smile our forced
smiles, talk our lightest words when our fellows come near to probe the wounds
we would cover away from sight, we are still angry and of fended because they
will not tell us of their ailments, because the cry of mortality in its
bitterest anguish is ever, "Leave me with my God " its most earnest prayer to
its eager fellows to be left alone  alone! 
(I the narrator) think it must be greatly for this cause that we like the
young; because, even though the pages of their book be blank, we are permitted
to look over them; and it might be for the same reason, viz., because she was
young, that George Geith, who had his secret coffined and buried, was angry
with Beryl for being what he called double-faced; for having her little by-play, too.
 Practical man as he was, he never paused to ask himself what all this interest
meant; what all this jealousy indicated; but talked on in his anger, while
shallow Dick Elsenham read him through and through, and thought, with a
half-compassionate contempt, that it would be rather good fun if the one
business man tried to cut out the other. He knew, or thought he knew, George
would have no chance with either father (mr molozane) or daughter (beryl);
though, to be sure, the Snareham connection put a new aspect on affairs. He
might as well inquire a little further into that. 
"I forget what relation you said you were to Sir Mark Geith," he said, as they
rode still behind the others. 
"Cousin," was the reply. "His father (the late baronet) and mine (adolphus geith) were brothers."
"Then you are the next heir, I suppose?"
"Not I! There is a certain uncle (mr arthur geith); there are probable
children; there are twenty other things between me and Snareham."
"Sir Mark is not married, though."
"Is he not? He and his wife (cissy hayles), at any rate, were at my office not
a month since," said George almost rejoicingly. "You seem to take a wonderful
interest in my relations, Mr Elsenham," he added. "May I inquire if you know any of them?"
"I have met your cousin (mark geith)," answered the other slowly. "I have met
him where I think he was making his money spin. He plays infernally high, Mr Geith."
"I suppose he has a right to do what he likes with his own," answered George. 
"You do not appear particularly to care about him or his doings," remarked Mr Elsenham. 
"I care enough," was the reply; "but what would you have? Mark's way and mine
lie in opposite directions. I cannot leave my path to follow his; and if I
could, I am not aware that he would thank me for my pains. There is too wide a
distinction between us for there to be much sympathy."
"Do you know much of him?" asked Mr Elsenham. 
"Had we been brothers I could scarcely at one time have known more," was the
reply; "but there comes a day, as you are aware, when the rich and the poor
must separate; and that day came long ago to us. He turned to his pleasure, I
to my business; and every year as it passes by must separate us more and more."
"He was a good-hearted fellow, I think?" said Mr Elsenham.
 "Never a better breathed," answered George. 
"Could he not have got you some appointment?" asked Mr Elsenham. 
"My dear sir," said George, with a look of the most profound compassion, "I do
not want an appointment. I hang on my own hook, which I find a great deal
stronger than any hook could be that was put up for me by another man."
"But the social standing?" suggested Mr Elsenham. 
"Social standing is success," answered the accountant, with a smile. "The
incarnation of social success is riding before us. When I am rich enough to
live in a place like Molozane Park, I shall have secured my standing likewise."
"What are you two talking about?" asked Miss Molozane, turning at the moment to
speak to the pair, who had gradually been drawing nearer and nearer to their companions. 
"About the poor; about the rich; about business; about the City," replied her
cousin (dick elsenham).
"Somewhat unusual subjects for you to discuss, are they not?" inquired Mr Werne. 
"I believe so," was the answer; "but getting into good company makes even fools
wise for the time being; and Mr Geith's conversation is of so practical a
character, that I cannot choose but follow suit."
"Mr Geith affects the City a little, I think I have under stood," remarked Mr Werne. 
"Mr Geith affects that which butters his bread," replied the accountant; "no
more, no less. Though it is but a modicum which has been allowed me, I am still
thankful not to have to eat my morsel dry."
"A sensible man to be a younger son, is he not, Mr Werne?" demanded Mr
Elsenham, stroking his moustache. "If work were not such a confounded bore, he
would almost persuade me to visit your El Dorado, and see whether I, too, could
not work a gold mine. It is a great thing to be earnest in anything, is it not?
See how soon he has made a disciple of me."
Doubtfully Mr Werne looked from the one man to the other before he said: 
"I did not think it had been possible to convert Mr Elsenham; and I
congratulate you, Mr Geith, on your success."
"Mr Geith has the true missionary gift," remarked the younger man. "He knows
how to stroke his cats without turning their hair the wrong way. Ah! if
missionaries could only comprehend the way of the grain, what a number of
pussies they might have purring after them!"
"Pussies have claws; so your simile is unfortunate, Dick," said Beryl. 
"But, with judicious management, claws may be cut, Miss Beryl," suggested
George, who took pleasure at the moment in following his companion's lead. "I
must, however," he added,. "disclaim, Mr Werne's implied compliment on my
success, for I have achieved none. It merely so happened that Mr Elsenham and I
agreed on a few points, and went together into them."
"You and Dick agreed!" said Beryl, with a look of astonishment. "On what points, may I ask?"
"It is not good for little girls to know too much," answered her cousin; "and,
besides, I want to inquire if we are to get home to-day; because, if we are, I
think we had better alter our pace."
"My road lies to Withefell Hall," said Mr Werne, "so I will not detain you
longer;" and he forthwith shook hands with the ladies; and touching his hat to
the gentlemen, before raising it in final salute to the party, turned out of
the sunshine to let them pass. 
"A good riddance," observed Mr Elsenham, who was striving with all his might to
accommodate his horse (sultan)'s long trot to the awful little canter of
Beryl's pony (Trot the pony): "when Mr Werne takes up his parable, I always
long to send him a gown and bands."
"And when I hear you talking against him, I always long to ornament you with a
pair of donkey's ears," said Beryl, pettishly. 
"Mr Geith was so charmed with his conversation," went on the young man; "he
likes the poor so much, and thinks stories of their thrift, and providence, and
necessity, so interesting and so instructive. The contrast, likewise, between
Beryl a sinner and Beryl a saint was delicious. Why are you not a saint at
home, cousin? You have no idea how much nicer we should all think you."
"I won't ride with you any more: I won't speak to you. I hate you, Dick," said
Beryl, and she pulled up her pony (Trot the pony) short. 
"Not you," answered her cousin, taking Trot's rein, and pulling him into a
gallop; "you like me a precious sight better than you like Mr Werne, when all is said and done."
"I do not; I can't bear you; and I never could; and you shan't pull my pony
(Trot the pony); and I will go home by myself."
"Would it go home by itself? and would it tell its papa (mr molozane) that bad
people teazed it when it was a saint? and said it had two faces, one for a
wicked world, and one for the immaculate owner of Molozane Park? and would it
cry, and look pitiful? Will it dry its eyes on Trot's mane? or shall I go after
Mr Werne to perform that operation for it?"
"I'll tell you what I shall do when I get home," said Beryl; "box your ears soundly."
"If it would improve your temper, box them now;" and Mr Elsenham stooped down
his head to receive the threatened punishment; but Beryl would not be appeased.
She rode steadily on; both hands on her reins, looking straight ahead, till she
suddenly turned to George and said: 
"And you are just as bad as Dick. I thought better of you, Mr Geith, I did."
"Now, it is your turn," remarked Mr Elsenham, "give it to him well, Beryl; you
don't know half he said against your idol."
"I said, Miss Beryl, that which I am prepared to stand to," observed George,
who was never slow to take up the cudgels in his own behalf. "I never could
see, and I never shall see, the good of talking so much about the poor: I was
not particularly impressed with Mr Werne  nor at all interested in his
conversation; but, at the same time, I do not doubt his being a most excellent
man; and am willing to admit that my want of appreciation may arise from a want of taste."
"He wearies me," said Matilda; "how Beryl can listen to him as she does, is a
complete puzzle. For my part, I think he has completely destroyed the pleasure of our ride."
"You needn't have come back to ride with him," pouted Beryl. 
"We will remember your hint next time," said Mr Elsenham; but Beryl would not
answer, nor take any notice of him. She was looking with such a reproachful
expression at the accountant that his heart melted towards her, and he felt
bound to do battle in her behalf. 
"If I recant, may I be forgiven, Miss Beryl?" he asked, in a low tone; and the
result was what might have made many another swear black to be white; for she
pulled her pony (Trot the pony) away from Dick, and riding round to the other
side of Mr Geith, took refuge between the hedge and Giraffe. 
"I am very sorry to have offended you," he said. "It was not your fault; you do
not know Mr Werne as I know him. When you do, you will think differently."
"I am ready to think differently now, if you desire it," remarked Mr Geith;
whereupon Mr Elsenham laughed, and declared the accountant was as great a
humbug as Mr Werne  a compliment which that gentleman received with perfect temper. 
"If I were only as good," he began. 
"It would be well for you," finished Beryl, snappishly; and the short-lived truce was broken. 

CHAPTER 21. BERYL EXPLAINS. 

There was one comfort with Beryl Molozane, that, if she had little fits of ill
humour, she did not stay long in them; and if she had periods of gravity and
propriety, they were short in comparison with the long summer days, which she
could fill with laughter and glee. 
Always after she had got up on a pedestal and made a saint of herself, Beryl
was sure to plunge into deeper depths than ever of fun and mockery. If she
could once be got to laugh, all her solemnity vanished, and the house rang
again with the sound of her mirth. 
And a dull house it would have been without Beryl, as George Geith, sitting
over his papers, acknowledged. She was to that place what the breath of life is
to the body: the moving power, the animating cause, which kept the blood
flowing through the veins, and smiles brightening the face. Her voice seemed
never silent, her tongue never still. From the garden her gay tones came into
the room where the accountant sate at work; lingering amongst the roses he
found her when it grew too dark for him to see to do more. 
"We are going to have a visitation on Monday, Mr Geith," she said. "Granny is
coming  Granny and her train."
"Her train? "repeated George, who was a little mystified. 
"Yes; Granny, like other great ladies, cannot travel without one; and she would
bring more people, only that papa won't have them here. As it is, she has her
maid (Gibbs) and (old Mr Elsenham)  old Mr Elsenham I mean, her brother-in-law 
and old Mr Elsenham's man; and she comes in a great chariot, which puts up at
the 'Stag,' at Wattisbridge, in company with her coachman (mrs elsenham's
coachman) and two footmen. She brought her (Elsenham butler) down the last
time, but I do not think she will try that again. He had a great deal to say to
our cook (jane) about there being no servants' hall, and at last came to me, to
observe he had not been accustomed to it."
"Did he tell you to what he had been accustomed? asked her companion. 
"No; I did not ask him, or probably he would; but I told him I was very sorry,
and that if he had any suggestions to make as to what he would like, I should
be glad to hear it. The beauty of it was," went on Beryl, "he knew I was making
fun of him, though he could not find a word to say, except that 'No; he had no
suggestion to make.' Then, said I, I do not see what I can do, for I am afraid
grandmamma might not like me to have you in the drawing-room; but if you choose, I will ask her."
"What did he say then?" inquired Mr Geith. 
"He (Elsenham butler) did not say anything to me," answered Beryl, "but he went
straight off to Granny, and gave her notice; and she actually raised his wages
and prayed him to stop; and he was graciously pleased to consent, only papa (mr
molozane) said he should not stop here; and so she had to send him back to
London, and I wish they would all stay there."
"Why does she not come by the Eastern Counties line?" asked George, with a
natural wonder that anyone who could help it should put herself to so much trouble. 
"For three reasons. One, she dislikes all railways; another, she cannot get to
the Shoreditch station without crossing the City; and a third, she thinks she
creates a sensation by coming down with as great a clatter as the Lord Mayor.
The people about here think she is mad; that is all she gets in the way of
public opinion out of her four horses."
"You don't mean to say that she travels with four horses?" said Mr Geith.
"She would travel with eight if she could manage it," answered Beryl; "Granny
is essentially but you will what she is for yourself when you see her.
Meantime, I am so glad you are going to stay here to-morrow, so that we may
have one day of peace before she comes."
George was glad too; and the intimacy between himself and the family at the
Dower House had by this time become so close, that he never thought of uttering
those courteous expressions of pleasure, regret, and so forth, which do good
duty at the commencement of an acquaintance, but which seem such trumpery coin
when acquaintance has ripened into something more, that friend never thinks of
offering it to friend. 
Accordingly, George Geith did not say he was glad  why, indeed, should he, when
he knew that Beryl was perfectly well aware he was pleased to stop? 
Thinking of his lonely Sundays in town, thinking of his lonely evenings at Fen
Court, thinking of the days when he had not a soul to speak to whom he liked,
nor a house at which he cared to visit where he was sure of a welcome, the
accountant sometimes became almost unmanned, and wondered how he should be able
to endure the old desolate life when he had to return to it in earnest once again. 
It is not sorrow, nor toil, nor anxiety, nor difficulty, which tries the
strength and endurance of a man like George Geith; but rather joy and
happiness. All the world over, natures like his prove the truth of the old
fable, in which it was not the strong north wind that beat down the traveller,
but rather the beams of a genial sun. 
Man bears that trouble to which he is born better than the glad sunshine for
which he had no right to look; and it had come by this time to such a pass with
George Geith, that, living in the light, he dared not look forth at the
darkness into which, sooner or later, he knew he must plunge.
 And those Sundays at the Dower House were so pleasant! when he could take his
rest without any twinges of conscience about work neglected and hours wasted;
when he could loiter over his dressing, listening to the insane co-cooing of
the pigeons and the prating of the hens; when he did not consider it his duty
to hurry over his breakfast, but could enjoy to the full that sunny morning
room, which always in after years came back to his memory with open windows and
floating muslin curtains; when the talk was so pleasant, the air so balmy, the
place and the people so like home! 
Then the leisurely walk across the fields to Wattisbridge! the short, smooth
grass on which the ladies' cool muslin dresses made a rustle as of the light
wings of birds, the delicious country air, the pleasant country sights, the
dancing of the squirrels in the wood, the loveliness of the wild flowers in the
hedges, the blue sky, the green earth, and the calm stillness of the Christian
Sabbath pervading all things, and underlying, like a soft key-note, the whole
music of animated nature!
And what if the pleasure were sensational? Happy is the man, I think, who can
take a sinless joy out of his senses! to whom Nature does not exhibit her
landscapes, chant her melodies, unveil her loveliness, all in vain! whom the
lights and sounds and flowers of the summer thrill with a strange delight, and
who can thank God for living and moving and having his being with the
unquestioning simplicity of a child! 
George Geith never felt so thankful about having resigned his profession as
when he came out of church with Beryl Molozane. Whilst he was a curate, living
within a sacred pale, fenced off to a certain extent from free contact with the
laity, he never heard how the laity pull their clerical guides to pieces. With
a sudden shock and horror it came upon him that perhaps in his day he had been
derided and scoffed at too  his manner mimicked, his tone ridiculed, his
mistakes pounced on, his sermons criticized. It was not healthy, he felt, for
the congregation to be setting itself up in judgment; and yet, if the teachers
were like the Wattisbridge clergy  muffs  what then? 
He could not contradict the truth of what the Molozanes said about rectors and
curates alike; but, at the same time, it was not pleasant for a man who had
been a clergyman to feel, that instead of himself and his brothers being, as he
once fondly imagined, teachers, they were rather set up as targets at which all
the small witticisms, all the trifling jests of their hearers might be directed.
 And had he dared to remind Beryl of the message these Wattisbridge curates
brought, he knew she would at once have answered that it was at the messengers,
not the message, she was laughing. But he did not dare. George, who in most
respects had not been wont to feel cowardly, was now so anxious to keep on good
terms with his host's family, that he often held his tongue when he knew he
ought to have opened his lips, and when, but for some strange feeling which
held him back, he would have liked to speak to her about this mockery of all
things (except Mr Werne), holy and pure, which offended him. 
For though he had thrown aside the gown, all esprit de corps had not departed
also, and he often felt inclined to stand up and do battle for these men,
against whom Dick Elsenham and Beryl Molozane were perpetually bending their
bows and twanging their arrows. 
Capping verses was nothing in comparison to the way this pair amused
themselves, capping the peculiarities of the (wattisbridge preacher). From the
great family pew, which Mr Molozane had not relinquished with the Park, the two
took mental notes, which they compared when they came out of church; and George
had heard Beryl, robed in a black silk cloak, with a red shawl hung on behind,
delivering a sermon  la Wattisbridge to perfection. He knew when he was
listening to her he ought to have gone out of the room, or offered some serious
remonstrance, but he had only joined in Dick's laughter, and encouraged Beryl
to further literary efforts; not a thing escaped her, not a movement, not a
look, and to people who were inclined to laugh Wattisbridge church offered
temptations innumerable. 
Often George caught himself thinking, "If I were there, how differently I would
have the service performed;" and then he felt devoutly thankful he was not
there, and that he never should have to preach again. For had his life depended
on it, he knew he could not, after hearing Beryl's comments, be ever able to
lift his mind above them, and he began to perceive how fine a thing it is for
clergymen, that, though they sometimes hear fault-finding, they never hear ridicule. 
What made Mr Geith more indignant against Beryl, if indignant be not far too
strong a word, was, that he knew perfectly well if Mr Werne were of the party,
her tone would have been very different. 
As it was, she chattered on  mocking, grimacing, ridiculing  till one might
have thought life a puppet show, containing no definite aim in time, no hope for eternity. 
George did not like it. He would have been better content to see Beryl down
almost in the depths of despair, than to notice that nothing in heaven above,
or in the earth beneath, seemed able to make any serious impression upon her.
Could she be sorry for long? Could she grieve sincerely? Would it be possible
for her to weep without the sunshine breaking through? Was there any
earnestness about her? Had she really a heart? In very truth, did she possess a
soul? Had women souls at all? he caught himself wondering, when Beryl woke him
out of his brown study with 
 "Well, Mr Geith, what treason are you plotting now?"
"I was wondering whether it would be possible for any man to preach a sermon at
which you would not care to laugh."
"I think it would  will you try? We shall have plenty of leisure this
afternoon, and we will listen to you as long as you like to talk. You shall
take for your text, 'Thou speakest as one of the foolish women speaketh,' if
you choose, and none of us will be offended."
"And then you will make fun of me to your heart's content."
"Oh! fie, Mr Geith; do I make fun of my friends? Can I see anything in them of
which to make fun? I suppose you are beginning to think, with Granny, that I
can be serious about nothing  that I can feel no trouble  carry no burden."
"If I did think so should I be wrong, Miss Beryl?" he inquired. 
"Et tu Brute!" was all the answer he could get out of her; but the brown eyes
proved more eloquent than her tongue, and looked reproaches at him  such
reproaches, that George felt himself constrained to say: 
"The truth is, I have never seen you grave but once, until yesterday; and yesterday  "
"You thought I was not grave in earnest," she quickly added, as he paused; "and
there you were wrong. You imagine, because it is necessary to my existence to
laugh at people's oddities, that I never feel for their woes. You think,
because I have a quick sense of the ludicrous, that I have no eyes for grief.
And there you do me an injustice. You often are unjust to me, Mr Geith."
"Am I?" he said; "tell me how, and I will strive to think all you wish for the future."
"Why, you have got that stupid notion which so many people take up, that the
same person cannot be sorry and merry. You fancy that, because I think the poor
funny, I do not also think they are often in great distress. They may be
humbugs  many of them are  and I see they are humbugs; but I know, at the same
time, that no matter what they may be, they feel heat, and cold, and the want
of blankets, and the dearness of coals, and their inability to get meat, just
as much as you or I. For this reason, I do my best to get them helped; but I
reserve to myself the privilege of laughing, to prove I am not imposed on; that
I see only their necessities as they are, and not their necessities as they
present them for public inspection. Hunger and thirst, Mr Geith, and the want
of fire and clothing, are realities, concerning which I suppose even I may
speak gravely if I please."
"Assuredly," answered her companion; "but there are other people besides the
poor at whom you laugh; about whom you never speak a grave sentence."
"You are thinking of the unhappy Mr Grey," she said, laughing. "I must make fun
of Mr Grey, and his light wavy hair; he is so terribly proper; so intensely
decorous; one sentence lasts him as long as half a dozen would anybody else;
one idea becomes in his hands a volume, sufficient for a whole day's slow conversation."
"But I believe he is an excellent young man," said Mr Geith, rebukingly. 
"Did you ever know anyone who was a frightful bore; who could do nothing at a
party but sit like a Pope on a hard chair, that was not an excellent young man?
I never did, and I have had a large experience of curates: besides, what do I
say against Mr Grey? nothing, except that if he stopped with his text his
sermons would be long enough; and that we are not to stare, because his
'mamma,' as he calls her, said he was shy, and that it was not good for him.
All that does not prevent my thinking there is something very touching in the
way his mother (mrs grey) listens to him preaching; and I would not for any
consideration let her hear me laughing at him; or say to her that I do not
think him a second St Paul. Indeed, it is quite true that I never look at Mr
Grey without thinking 'He was the only son of his mother, and she was a widow.'"
This was the way Beryl spoiled every sentence she uttered. She never could
sketch a grave face without putting a mocking one behind it. Whether from
habit, or from some mental distortion, it seemed impossible for her to
disassociate even the most earnest things from the grotesque. The most serious
subject had its laughable side; over graves the clown seemed dancing; behind
tears there was an imp gibing and grinning. 
There seemed nothing earnest in her, save that which is the common heritage of
true-hearted women  love. She did not make fun of those she loved. Was that the
reason she was grave with Mr Werne? 
George marvelled, and thought he would beat that cover, too. 
"How does it happen," he asked, smiling, "that you never laugh at these things
and people when you are with Mr Werne?"
"How do you know I do not?" she quickly retorted. 
"Because your cousin (dick elsenham) told me so," he answered. 
"I shan't tell you  I can't tell you," she almost cried; but then, calming down
in a moment, she went on: "Mr Werne is different from most people. There is a
gravity about him which infects even me; he is so earnest himself; he thinks
life such a frightfully solemn affair that he makes me solemn in spite of
myself. He compels me to feel good and miserable while I am with him. I am not
laughing now, Mr Geith. I am only telling you the honest, sober truth."
And her face changed so while she was speaking that George could not doubt her
word'; could not think for a moment she was deluding herself and misleading
him; only he wondered more and more as to what it was Beryl really intended, as
to what she really meant. 
Two minutes after no one would have thought she meant anything; jesting with Mr
Elsenham; laughing at her sister (matilda); who could have told what with her
was real what assumed!. 
Which was the actual nature? that which skimmed through existence on the wings
of mirth, or that which looked at life for an instant through tears? 
Who may judge? Which of us, friends, may even guess at the true part of our
neighbour's nature, when we are incompetent to lay our finger on the sterling metal in our own? 
CHAPTER 22. ACROSS THE FIELDS. 

There was no evening service at Wattisbridge, and as it did not suit the
Molozanes to attend church in the afternoon, the three young ladies
(beryl)(matilda)(louisa), their cousin (dick elsenham), and Mr Geith, walked
over in the evening to Withefell Bottom, a little hamlet lying two miles on the
other side of Withefell proper, where the vicar held forth on the saving nature
of faith, and buried works out of sight, under a mausoleum of his own erection. 
Beryl was kind enough to give an epitome of the probable sermon to the quartet
after dinner; and Mr Geith, who had in clerical days been a little "high,"
forbore to blame her, even in his heart, for her mimicry. Rather he enjoyed the
ridicule; for Mr Elsenham informed him, privately, that the vicar was a pet of
the Withefell saint; and that not only the Withefell saint, but the proprietor
of Withefell Hall, affected the teaching of the clergyman who preached faith without works. 
"Filthy rags of our own self-righteousness," said Beryl. "I always fancy bits
of red cotton floating from gooseberry bushes when I hear that; but perhaps Mr
Geith may like the vicar. He is greatly run after by people who really think
all they can do mere mites in the treasury; and also by those who would like to
go to heaven without working at all: vide Mr Finch. Eh, Dick? "
"Mr Finch be hanged," said Mr Elsenham in answer. 
"You would have said something else if Mr Geith had not been here," observed Louisa.
"It is all the same to me what he is," remarked her cousin. 
"I were the architeck of my own fortunes, I were," said Beryl, coming down from
her pulpit in a minute. "I never owed no man nothing in the way of gratitude. I
wasn't like you, Mr Elsenham: you was brought up in the lap of luxury; you had
but to ring for this and t'other, and say, 'John, bring me this; John, fetch me
that.' With me it were, 'Ned, you young beggar, where are you skulking?' or
'Ned, you lazy scoundrel, look sharp.' You loll in carriages, young man. You
never rode in a wan, I'll be bound. I were glad, I were, to get a post as dog
in a wan; I like that better nor ever I did since I made my fortune, riding in
a carriage like a swell. Well, well, the ups and downs is wonderful; my old
master's sons, the one is a counter-hopper, and the other a private in the
53rd. He went to the dogs, he did, and here am I, Edward Finch, Esquire, J. P.,
and owner of Withefell Hall. Life's strange, ain't it, Miss Beryl?"
"I wish you would not, Beryl," said Miss Molozane; and then Mr Geith knew in a
minute that Mr Finch was the individual who had aspired to Miss Molozane's
hand, and whom Beryl had said she should prefer to Dick Elsenham. 
"And would Beryl have done so?" George asked himself. Would not the polish,
slight though it might be, have been better to the girl than the frightful
vulgarity of the other's address? With Mr Finch he felt inclined to shout out,
"Life's strange, ain't it?" and to wonder what there was in it real and true. 
"Do you remember, Beryl, the Sunday you and I were turned out of Withefell
church?" asked Dick, with a malicious twinkle in his black eyes. 
"Yes; and I remember with satisfaction the handful of hair I pulled out of your
head before we were turned out," retorted Beryl, viciously. 
"What had you been doing?" asked Mr Geith. 
"It was one Sunday, when we were little children," answered Beryl; "and as we
were both horribly tired of being at the Park doing nothing, we stole out, and
trotted off to Withefell church, across the fields. Nobody there knew who we
were, and when Dick and I got fighting over which should have the hymn-book, we
were taken out; but not before we had made a frightful noise with rolling off
the seat. I was carried out, I believe, and carried home. One thing I do
recollect, that I scratched Dick's face; and I sometimes wish I was young
enough to scratch it again." And Beryl pulled a grimace at her cousin. 
"You may make the most of your time," he said, "for you won't dare do that when Granny comes."
"I wish both you and your Granny were in the bottom of the sea," remarked
Beryl; "why don't you keep her in London? we don't want her here."
"I am sure I don't," he answered. "Tell me some way of preventing her coming, and I will."
"Tell her we have small-pox  fever  cholera  what you choose. Like all good
people, she is afraid of death. You will be so pleased with Granny, Mr Geith;
she is such a nice old lady, so much like her grandson."
"I declare she is not in the least like me," interrupted Mr Elsenham. 
"That is a pity, is it not, Mr Geith? I have not one of her letters at hand,
but I think I can repeat one of her epistles."
"Do you wish me to leave the room?" asked Miss Molozane. 
"I am quite indifferent," answered Beryl, as she took up a piece of paper lying
on the table, and began, after clearing her throat: 
"My dear Niece,  It seems to me a long time since I heard from you, but I trust
your silence does not proceed from any other cause than that of having been
more agreeably occupied than in writing to an old woman. I shall trust to hear
you, your dear papa, Beryl, and Louisa are well. 
"I hope to see you, if perfectly convenient (D.V.), on Monday next. Thankful as
I am and ought to be to the Lord for his unspeakable mercies, I still feel I am
getting old, and that an occasional change, and intercourse with young people
is desirable. Will you therefore write, by return, saying whether you can
receive me, Mr Elsenham, Gibbs, and Walton. The remainder of the servants (mrs
elsenham's coachman) (two footmen) can remain as usual at the 'Stag.'
"With kind remembrances to your father, Beryl, and Louisa, and much love for
yourself, "Your affectionate grandmother, 
"M. L. Elsenham."
"L stands for Lucretia," explained Beryl, as she paused; "and I ought, perhaps,
further to state that  "
"Cannot you let her alone while she is in London?" interrupted Mr Elsenham;
"and go and put on your bonnet, and let us get off to church."
"You are so fond of church, Dick."
"I'd like it better if there were any pretty girls in the parish," retorted her
cousin. Whereupon Miss Molozane rebuked them both; Mr Elsenham for making the
remark, and Beryl for provoking it. "The house is really like a bear-garden,
with the two of you in it," observed the beauty (Matilda Molozane). 
"What is a bear-garden, Tilly?" asked Louisa gravely; but Miss Molozane
declined giving any explanation; rather preferring to follow her cousin's
advice, and prepare for their walk. 
It was pleasant going to church across the fields in the evening, but George
did not much care for the path as they came back. For one thing, the days were
beginning to draw in, and, for another, the sky was cloudy and dull, seeming to threaten rain. 
Altogether there was a gloom over the landscape which depressed him, and the
company of Messrs Finch and Werne, who were so good as to walk back most of the
way with the Dower House party, did not tend to raise his spirits. At every
step he seemed to hear the chink of gold; every sentence reminded him that
these men had made their money whilst he was still struggling. Houses, lands,
wealth, position, he reflected, lay waiting for the acceptance of Mr Molozane's
daughters (beryl)(matilda)(louisa).
 Bitterly he remembered that these people would be walking across the green
Hertfordshire fields, and talking to the girls who had taught him what a happy
home was like, in the (to him) dreary days to come, when he had done his work,
and spoken his farewells, and returned to the old drudgery again.
He had no right to repine, certainly: he had been happy, he had enjoyed
himself, his health was re-established, he had gained strength and fresh vigour
through breathing the pure country air. Why, then, should he grieve? and George
caught at the leaves of the trees, and plucked them off ruthlessly as he asked
himself this question. 
Why should he grieve? Ah, friends and fellow-travellers! how often are we asked
this question? how often do we put it ourselves, and how seldom can we return
any satisfactory answer to it? We have had our cake, we have eaten it. There
has been no bitter in it; to the last crumb we have found it sweet. Why grieve,
then? for we cannot eat and have. 
But who does not grieve, who does not sorrow, for that passing away which is,
after all, the real misery of life? Friends, youth, beauty, fame, happiness,
hours, where the sun is streaming on us, moments when in the moonlight we look
at faces which we love, days which are full of such happiness that they seem
scarcely to have been spent on earth; all these we touch, to feel they are but
part of a procession which is ever moving from us, ever passing away. Why
should we grieve? Good heavens! how could we do otherwise, when we know so well
that after the sunshine comes gloom  after the day, night? Is it marvellous
that, feeling the darkness creeping on, we should linger to the last in the
light? that, feeling the waves of the cruel ocean we have breasted licking our
feet, we should stretch out our hands after the groups that are walking away
over the pleasant sands we shall never tread more? 
Life's days are so gloomy when the summer is gone, its streets are so deserted
when the gallant cavalcade is past, its ways are so stony when we have to tread
them alone, that it is no wonder we grieve when the hour comes for parting, and
the sad good-byes are spoken; no wonder, even though we have had all our right,
our holiday, our cake, our milk. 
George Geith had had his holiday, his happy sunshiny days of leisure; but
behold! the holidays were well-nigh spent, and he was going back to resume his
old low place in the school of life. 
He was in bad spirits; he was dull; he was cross, if you will; and Beryl's
cheerfulness vexed him, even though that cheerfulness was evinced in
disagreeing with Mr Werne, and laughing at his opinions. 
For once before the Withefell saint Beryl was not demure; and when she was
running most counter to all his ideas, she would look over to Mr Geith for
approval, which, as she was annoying Mr Werne for the sake of pleasing Mr
Geith, I think she deserved. 
But George would not be appeased  not even when they got upon the question of
the millennium, concerning the time of which Beryl expressed her belief that
the Withefell vicar must have recently had some secret information from above. 
"Because, how otherwise," said the young lady, "could he know for certain that
it would be three years hence exactly?"
"I must say his arguments was very convincing," here put in Mr Finch. 
"You don't mean though, I suppose, that you believe there will be an end of all
things at the end of three years?" said Beryl. 
"I believe we are living in remarkable times," answered Mr Finch, who
pronounced the word as if it were "remarkyble; ""and that we cannot tell the
day nor the hour, and that therefore, as Mr Wilton says, we ought to put our houses in order."
"But Mr Wilton says we do know the day and hour," interposed Louisa, "for he
declared that, reading the signs of the times, the end of the world would come
at the expiration of three years exactly."
"For which reason," added Beryl, a little flippantly, "if it were not for
death, which really may come at any minute, we needn't be in such a hurry about
our houses till nearer the time."
"Do you know," said Mr Werne, "it appears to me the service has not benefited us much."
"I am sure it has not benefited me," answered Miss Molozane; "for I was bored
to death, and I have got a chill from the damp of the church. Mr Finch, you
really ought to build a new one; it is enough to kill any one sitting in it for a couple of hours."
"It lies in such a hollow," explained Mr Werne.
"There are plenty of nice sites in the neighbourhood," observed Beryl. 
"How does it happen you don't express no opinions about the sermon, sir?" asked
Mr Finch, turning benignly towards George. 
"I am one of those happy individuals who have no opinions," replied the accountant. 
"Oh! Mr Geith, when you know you are a long way towards Rome," said Miss
Molozane; while Louisa followed with 
"Yes, indeed, Mr Werne; he goes far beyond the Wattisbridge people. He does not
think the service there is performed properly at all."
"He wants a procession of priests, crosses, and candles; and he would feel
happier if he could go to confession," added Beryl. 
"Miss Beryl, as usual, is sacrificing her acquaintances to her love of
amusement," answered Mr Geith; whilst Mr Werne turned towards him with a
curious expression in his face  an expression the meaning of which George did
not understand till afterwards. 
"But about the church," said Beryl, coming back to the point from which Mr
Finch had diverged. "Won't you build one? pray do. It would involve ever so
much gaiety, and we want some excitement. Let me see; there would be the stone
laying, and the opening, and we might have a few bazaars; and then whoever was
married in it first, ought to invite everybody in the parish to the wedding."
"I suppose you would like a dance on the green at the consecration of the
graveyard?" said Dick Elsenham. 
"I should like a dance anywhere, under any circumstances," returned Beryl. "It
is nearly as long a thing as I can remember, being at a party. Mr Finch, I
really think I should be better pleased if you were to give a ball than if you
were to build a church."
"Now it's curious, ain't it," remarked Mr Finch to the company generally, "that
I was just a-thinking of giving a hop."
"How enchanting!" exclaimed Beryl. "Do tell us all about it. Won't you have the
dancing in the picture gallery, and  "
"I believe, Miss Molozane, I must say good evening," here interposed Mr Werne;
and shaking hands with all the party, he turned across Molozane Park to his own residence. 
Heaven knows what thoughts he carried with him by the way; but, judging from
the look wherewith he regarded Beryl at parting, they could not have been pleasant. 
"There is a (generic mark) against your name, old fellow," said Mr Elsenham to
Mr Geith, looking after the retreating figure. "Werne will set you down as a
Jesuit, and gravely remonstrate my uncle (mr molozane) on the danger of having you in the house."
"He is welcome," answered George. "I shall not be long in it now, at any rate;"
and the pair walked on in silence, listening to Beryl teazing Mr Finch to death
about the ball, insisting he should fix a time, and earnestly intreating him to
come to the Dower House and talk over the preliminaries.
 "Grandmamma will be with us to-morrow," said Beryl, demurely. "She will be so glad to see you."
"Thank you. I shall be very pleased to call on Mrs Elsenham; very so, indeed;
and if these gentlemen will come up and eat their mutton with me on Tuesday 
dine in a plain way  I shall be better pleased still. I am very sorry, sir, not
to have made your acquaintance earlier," he added, turning to George; "I should
like to have a chat with you about the City. I'm from the City myself, sir, and
I'm not ashamed to say so to nobody."
To which speech what answer could Mr Geith make, but that he saw no occasion
for anything but pride in the recollection? 
"And you'll come too, won't you?" continued Mr Finch, turning towards Mr
Elsenham, which Dick assured him he would, stating for a reason after they
parted from the owner of Withefell Hall, "that his wine was tip-top, although
his grammar was the devil."
"Shall I tell you what your mutton will be, Mr Geith? "asked Beryl. "Fish and
mock turtle; ducks and green peas; lamb and mint sauce; entres innumerable;
puddings by the score; every vegetable you can mention; every fruit you can
imagine. And his sister  oh! I must show you Miss Finch when we get home. And
in the way of wines, he will give you what he calls 'clarick' and 'mussel;' and
white and red; and heavy and light; and he will tell you that he himself does
not care for anything but port; that there was a time when he knew more about
gin and 'Old Tom' than any genteel swallow; and that he ain't sure but a good
glass of Hollands still beats Mounseer and Cavalero into fits."
"I do not intend, however, Miss Beryl, to drink Mr Finch's wine, and make fun
of him afterwards," remarked Mr Geith, a little ill-humouredly. 
"Don't then," said Beryl; "but, as I do not care for either hock or claret, I
shall make fun of him if I please. It's a good soul, though. I like Mr Finch.
He is a great favourite of mine."
"Heaven preserve me, then, from that distinction," murmured George, devoutly. 
"But he is not one of my friends," she said, in a lower tone  a tone which came
back to him often when the future became the present. "You have disapproved of
my being grave, Mr Geith; were you graciously pleased to approve of me this evening?"
"It is not for me to express an opinion," he replied. 
"But it is, if you form one," she answered. "I am vexed now that I annoyed Mr
Werne. He is better than anybody else I know; but I was in a teazing mood, and
I thought you did not care for me to be in earnest; and so I have fallen
between two stools, as most people do when they try to please their neighbours."
"I hope you have not hurt yourself much," said her companion; and though Beryl
could not help laughing, the tears came into her eyes whilst she laughed. Pity
it was getting so dark that George could not see them! 
But without seeing them, he began that night taking himself to task. Sitting by
the open window, inhaling the perfumes that came floating to him from the
garden, alone, in the still ness, he commenced that personal cross-examination
in which so few have the courage to persevere. 
What did all this grief mean? What was this tearing at his heart? Why was he
afraid to look forward? Why had he been so unutterably happy with these girls?
He had never admired Beryl; he knew he did not now care for Matilda; whilst, as
for Louey! Setting Matilda and Louey out of the question, however, thinking of
a woman not as of a picture, but as a friend and companion, was not it Beryl he
sorrowed to leave?  Beryl, who now occupied a shrine in his heart which had
never been filled before by woman? For, though he had admired many; though he
had all his life been a worshipper of beauty; though he had acknowledged may
queens, fluttered around many a flame, he had never before felt anything like
this  this which was eating into his soul, making existence insupportable, the
future intolerable without her. 
Through the long hours he sat thinking of this new gospel, which he had fancied
was an old one with him, pondering over the mystery of this strange sensation
which had stolen upon him so gently, so tranquilly, that it had become a part
of himself before he dreamed of danger. 
And now, when he saw the danger, what then? Did he resolve to win and to wear;
did he ever, even in fancy, see Beryl his wife  hear her call him husband? 
Never once; for there are some pains which bring with them partial numbness;
and this agony of hopeless love, of love which could but love and leave, left
him no strength for aught save the thought that he must go away; that at all
hazards he must break the spell; and depart, carrying his wound with him. 
He had never been able to realize Beryl married; even in his jealousy, even
when he imagined she was lending a too favourable ear to Mr Werne, he had never
pictured her mistress of the Park; and now, when he came to understand that
without her his life would be lonely for ever, he still could not fancy this
girl a wife; no delusive picture of domestic happiness arose out of the
darkness to mock him with false hopes. 
And, supposing the choice to have been presented to him, of living on in his
present paradise, or of taking his Eve out of it into the wide world beyond, (I
the narrator) think George Geith would have chosen the former without an
instant's hesitation. Fenced round by the hedges of Dower House; wandering
amongst the roses in its old-fashioned garden; standing in the twilight on the
terrace; he had felt secure both from sorrow and sin. The past lay outside, the
future was forgotten. His long servitude, his seven years of work, his nights
of toil, his days of anxiety, were all left behind when once the dear old house
was reached, when once kindly voices greeted him, and soft hands touched his in welcome. 
There was no need to think of money, no necessity for planning about ways and
means; and to many a man it takes the gloss off love to have to be thinking
about pounds, shillings, and pence; about sirloins of beef and legs of mutton,
and that little account of the baker's, which he foresees the blessing of a
wife will entail upon him. Love-making is a pleasanter occupation than
calculating "how much a year." Somehow, computing the expense of a woman's keep
destroys the idea of her divinity. The business view of matrimony is not a
pleasant one; but that romantic affection which is the full enjoyment of to-day
forgets that there must come a to-morrow, is a foretaste of heaven in which
to-day is for ever, and to-morrow and the end never. 
It is a mistake, (I the narrator) think, to imagine that a man's thoughts rush
off straight from love to marriage, from ideality to reality. On the contrary,
it appears to me natural that most men should ignore the mainland, with its
labour, its care, its responsibility, so long as they can float over the ocean
of love without trouble, without fear. 
Moreover, if the acme of misery be the inability to hope, the acme of happiness
is surely the absence of any wish to hope, of anything to wish for, save this,
that the present might go on for ever without change. 
And this was the state of beatitude in which George Geith had been living, and
from which he wakened with a start to tell himself he must go. For what was he
to Beryl, and what could Beryl Molozane be to him, save a memory of happiness?
In the dull, dull days to come, when the snow was on the ground, when the frost
was lying on the graves in Fen Court, when the black trees were dripping with
blacker rain, and the pavements were sloppy, and the City wretched, he should
still in recollection see Beryl standing among the roses, still hear her laugh
ringing out happy and mirthful as of yore. To him she would never grow old; to
him there would be no awful hereafter of grey hair, of wrinkles, of old
youngness, of sickness, feebleness, loss of youth. She would be his young love
to him for ever; his to the day of his death, the laughing, singing, gleeful
Beryl, of sweet seventeen. Other men might see their brides change to matrons,
but for him there would be no change. She would be in his memory just the same,
for ever and for ever. 
Shall (I the narrator) go on telling how through the night he sat hugging his
misery to him; indulging in melancholy, and finding sweetness in the cup, as
though he were still a boy, and young enough to find imaginary luxury in a
draught he had never tasted? 
Shall I repeat the old, old story, of how first love  first, though it come as
the finish to fifty fancies, hath still power to strike off the iron bands of
time, and leave the soul free from the incubus of the years that have aged and
worn the body? Would it not weary the reader to tell of the mist of tears
through which this strong man beheld his ship going down among the breakers; to
describe how, with head bent forward and arms folded on the window-sill, he
made his discovery, and decided on his future course, whilst the gloom deepened
and darkened, and wrapped him lovingly and gently in the clouds of night? 
He was unmanned, and it was well that there were none who could see his face,
for of all the troubles he had met and surmounted no trouble had ever come nigh
unto him like this. 
And yet, if he could have retraced his steps, would he? Ah! who that has loved
would choose his ways to have been different? Who, after eating of the tree of
the knowledge of good and evil, would go back into Eden and leave the fruit untasted? 
Amongst thorns and brambles his future way may lie, for his sake the ground may
be cursed, and the earth yield her increase only in sorrow and with pain. 
All this matters not, for his eyes have been opened, and it is something, even
when wandering through all earth's darkest places, for him to remember that he
has once caught a glimpse of heaven!
CHAPTER 23. A LITTLE SURPRISE. 

How many good resolutions which night hears made, does not morning see broken?
What does not wear a different aspect at noontide from that which it did at
midnight? What course decided on in the darkness do we not modify in the light?
Are we the same men and the same women, (I the narrator) marvel, as the clock
chimes the early morning hours, as we were when they were striking in the
starlight stillness? Or are we like the lady of the fairy tale, who was a true
wife one half of her time and a wandering wolf the other?
If night's good resolves could be carried into action after sunrise on the
morrow, what a perfect world we should live in. If sluggards could but rise at
the first call; if the weak could be but as strong; if the strong could be but
as forbearing when day breaks as they meant to be a few hours before, would not
our neighbours be almost too good? would not our own virtues dazzle our eyes?
If ever the time arrives when that is done in the morning which was decided on
overnight, there will be no more stories to write of weakness, sorrow,
repentance, remorse. The world will be peopled with saints, and our bookshelves
will be full of the lives thereof! 
But as matters stand at present, the pie-crusts on which we expend so much
labour in solitude are broken as soon as we come face to face with the world
and its temptations. It was so with George Geith at any rate. The Beryl thought
of in the midst of night's solemnity was a different being to the Beryl he met
glancing amongst the flowers. She was something in the one case to part from,
to beware of, as a snare and a sorrow; whilst in the other she was a girl to
see as much of as possible; to be near, to talk to, to laugh with, as long as
circumstances would permit. 
The night had bid him depart; the sunshine begged him to stay. The still voice
of the darkness had said, "Go; for each hour will but increase the misery of
the inevitable parting;" but the summer wind murmured pleasanter words, as it
fanned his cheek caressingly, and whispered, "Be happy whilst you may; your
stay can do no harm to anybody but yourself."
What man would not have hearkened to the latter voice, and still basked on in
the sunshine, more particularly when it seemed as if that morning, beyond all
other mornings, Beryl had laid herself out to be agreeable and winning? She had
her dogs with her on the lawn, where the (white poodle) marched about gravely
on his hind legs, and (Royal the dog) offered first his right and then his left
paw to George, with a sublime gravity which was irresistibly ludicrous. 
From the lawn they walked up the elm avenue, and as they walked Beryl spoke of
her father (mr molozane) and sisters (louisa) (matilda) with a pretty gravity
which was amazingly becoming to her. 
Had not Mr Geith noticed how ill papa was looking? Could he, would he, tell her
how affairs were likely to turn out? Should they be able to keep the Park? To
which latter question George made answer that he could not exactly tell her
yet; but he inquired, "if it were to be sold, would Mr Elsenham not purchase
it, and so keep the property in the family?"
"He could not," Beryl replied; "he has not sixpence in the world of his own.
Granny wanted to buy it, but papa would not sell. She then wished to rent it,
but he preferred letting it to Mr Werne."
"Would Mrs Elsenham not purchase it for her grandson?" George inquired. 
"No; and if she would, I am sure papa could never bear to see Dick master of the Park."
"Does he not like him?" asked her companion. 
"Have you lived all this time with us, and not found that out?" she retorted. 
"Papa likes Dick almost as well as I do."
"But, seriously, you appear to me excellent friends."
"Do we?" she said; "that show how much appearances may mislead."
"Do you mean then that you really are not friends? From what you said about Mr
Elsenham, I expected to find him an intolerable puppy. I confess I have been
agreeably disappointed in him, and "
"And you think Tilly has chosen wisely," she added. "Well, Mr Geith, if that be
your opinion, it is not mine. You do not know Dick; you have never seen him yet
in a fair light. I would not be in Dick's power, I would not be at the mercy of
his generosity for any earthly consideration. I would rather be indebted to
Granny, and that is saying all I can say."
"If Mr Molozane dislikes him, why does he permit the marriage to go on?"
"Now, Mr Geith, do you think he could stop it if Granny and Tilly have set
their hearts on its taking place? Besides, if Tilly likes him  and she does, I
suppose  is not that all we need care for? Sometimes I can't hold my tongue
about him to her, but afterwards I could bite it out for my pains."
"I should like to know why you dislike him so much, whilst you appear to get on so well together."
"It is very likely you will have your desire gratified if you go with him to
the Hall to-morrow evening," she said significantly, colouring a little as she
spoke. "You have seen Dick at his very best, I assure you; and as for our
getting on well, I have never yet met with anybody I could not talk to, except
Granny; and even Louey is afraid of her. Louey will take to her writing as if
she were earning ten thousand a year when Mrs Elsenham comes."
"Do you think your sister would show me any of her writing?" he asked. 
"To be sure she would, and be pleased at anybody taking an interest about the
matter. I was looking at some of her things the other day, and I really do
think they are very strange and wonderful, if I could understand them; but then
I never was in the least clever. Now, I think Tilly, who is, might read Louey's
poems to please her."
"Does Mr Molozane not read them?"
"I think I told you we had lost one sister (olivia)," she said; and the
explanation was satisfactory. "I will ask Louey for some of her poems." And
straight away darted Beryl, followed at full flight by the dogs, who went
growling and rolling over each other as they sped after her. 
I am afraid George anathematized the manuscripts. It is very nice to be
literary, and to talk on intellectual subjects may be very interesting and
improving to those who care about intellect; but a walk, for all that, in the
clear bright air of a summer morning, with a pretty, lively girl for a
companion a girl, moreover with whom one is secretly in love  is nicer and more interesting still.
 "Hang the poems!" thought the accountant, as he retraced his steps towards the
house; and who may blame him? 
"She is busy now," said Beryl, when she returned; "but she will look you some
out after breakfast. She was so pleased about your wanting to see them, Mr
Geith! Somehow I do not think we are right about Louey. It cannot be good for
anybody to live a life apart, as she does; can it?"
"I think, if she were my sister, I should try to understand her a little," answered George. 
"I wish I could; I wish I was clever!" sighed Beryl. "Now, if she would write
prose, I should be able to read her things; but poetry  oh, if you could but
imagine how it wearies me! If you do think her rhymes foolish, Mr Geith, I am
sure I need not ask you not to tell her so. She is hardly more than a child
yet, though she does scribble on constantly." 
And the tears sprang into Beryl's eyes as she spoke, though from what secret
well they gushed George could not imagine. He only knew that this quick
sensitiveness, this April nature, which was for ever changing, where there was
sunshine one moment and shade the next, was one of Beryl's greatest charms. 
He was beginning to understand how slight a line divides mirth from melancholy;
how quickly tears may dim eyes that have been a moment before dancing with
merriment. He was commencing to learn wherein this girl's power of attraction
lay, viz., in a mental constitution which combined the keenest sense of the
ridiculous with the deepest sympathy for suffering; which, while it could see
something ludicrous in the most ordinary  ay, and, it might be, in the saddest
circumstances of every-day life  had yet every chord attuned to echo the
slightest breath of trouble, the faintest sigh of woe. If the finest wit be
near akin to the deepest wisdom; so, the extremest gaiety is next-door
neighbour to the truest sorrow; and those people who in themselves combine the
two opposites of light heartedness and sadness, charm us as the Irish melodies
charm us, we scarcely know why, till we learn the secret of their peculiarity,
which is, that plaintive minors are ever mingling with joyous majors; and that
wherever a ringing octave comes we may be sure a melancholy seventh will succeed thereto. 
Thinking of this, thinking of what strange creatures women are, and of how much
stranger some women are than others, George got fairly addled after breakfast
among his accounts, and for once he was not sorry to see Louisa entering the
library, and Louisa, moreover, without her cap. 
He was so astonished at the change in her appearance, that for a minute he
could not take his eyes off her. "Do you not think it an improvement?" said the
young lady, who, like Beryl, was not very easily disconcerted; though, like
Beryl, she blushed a little as she spoke. 
"I should think I do," he answered. "What can have induced you to disfigure
yourself for so long a time?"
"My hair is only just growing again," she laughed, touching her short silky
locks; "but I thought I should like to put on my best looks for Granny. Here
are my manuscripts, Mr Geith. Beryl said you would take the trouble of reading
them;" and she straightway laid down the papers, and walking across the room,
took up her old position on the library steps. 
"Are you going to read them?" she asked, surveying him calmly from her vantage-ground. 
"What! now?" he said. 
"Certainly, now, this minute. I want to see what you think of them. I shall
know better from your face than from any words you may speak." 
It was a pleasant announcement certainly; but still George did not shrink from
the task. He had voluntarily undertaken it; and if the manuscripts had to be
read, and read moreover in the presence of the author, why, they should be read, that was all! 
Besides, he really was curious to see what Louisa could find to say about
things in general, and men and women in particular; and, accordingly, he opened
the first folio which came to his hand, and which proved to be a tragedy in
five acts, written out  as the productions of young authors always are written
out so legibly, with such loving neatness, that a printer might weep regretful tears over them.  
For a while George read on steadily, then he began to lift his eyes from the
page and look towards the author doubtfully. Meantime she sat perfectly still
on the top of the steps, with her elbows resting on her knees, and her chin
supported with both hands, staring at him with the most absorbed air of contemplation imaginable. 
She would have been a proud girl at that minute, could she have known exactly
what was passing through his mind. For it had suddenly dawned upon him, what
some creatures in their teens can write before they die! 
There was not much in the story, perhaps, and certainly nothing original in its
treatment. A father wrongfully executed; a son vowing himself to revenge; a
woman faithful in love, yet strong in duty; the scene laid in the remotest
Saxon ages; there was little in all this to interest a man like George Geith,
and yet he was interested in the authoress and astonished at her talent. 
He was sufficient of a critic to be able to sift out the corn from the chaff;
and as he came upon such a passage as this: 
"Revenge! 
It is the fire which passion strikes from vice,"
he could not help marvelling where, in the name of wonder, the girl had gathered her ideas from. 
On and still on he read: 
"Go to; I feel not love: 'twas made for fools, 
And is a worthless boon."
"It was my all; I gave it thee."
(I the narrator) am copying from the original manuscript, and I pause here to
ask, what George Geith asked himself, where do these thoughts come from? How
can people whom the breath of passion has never touched, whom the flames of
love have never scorched, imagine these things? how, when they have imagined
them, can they put them into words? The genius of youth must, I think, be
inspiration. It is easy to conceive how those who have passed through the
furnace can tell of its heat; but it is as impossible to imagine how those who
have never been tried in the fire of love, hate, or revenge, can write of their
intensity, as to think how men who have never trodden the shores of a foreign
land can describe its scenery. 
Still George read on, read conscientiously, till he came to the last page; then
he turned over the cover, and looked at Louisa. 
"Well, Mr Geith?" He could see that the face of the Molozane Solomon (Louisa)
was very pale as she said this interrogatively. 
"I am astonished, Miss Louisa. I did not think you could have done it. I do not
know where you can have got it."
And opening the manuscript again, he looked once more over this: 
"Thou knowest not my nature: 
The babbling brook, that ever pines and frets, 
A breeze will stir; but the wide boundless ocean 
Smiles at the feeble breeze, and can be tost 
By Heaven's whirlwinds only: so my soul 
Looked on life's troubles with a placid eye, 
And bore them meekly, as what all endured, 
And the gods ordered; but the loftier storm 
Hath roused its slow-awakened energies, 
And stern and steady are they."
"You think I can write, then?" She was by this time standing beside him. 
"I am certain you can."
"And shall I make money?"
"That is a different matter; you may perhaps hereafter."
"Hereafter! when?"
"Fifteen, twenty years, perhaps," he said. 
"When papa (mr molozane) is dead; when the Park is gone; when I shall care for
nothing; when it will not signify what comes or what goes;" and she fell on her
knees beside the table, and rained such tears over her papers as George had
never previously seen fall from a woman's eyes. Did he need to ask then whence
she got part of her inspiration? Was he coming to understand at last that the
life's book of the youngest may hold within its pages something of which the
philosophy of the oldest dreams not? 
Had this been the vision of the child beside him? Had she been thinking to
redeem the past, to gild the future? Had she fallen into the usual error of
imagining an ink-bottle would prove a gold mine, and quires of foolscap an El
Dorado? Had she too built costly castles reaching to the skies? Had she talked
to her own heart of the certainty of possibilities? In the solitude of soul
into which she seemed to have retired, had she sketched the outline of a
landscape which was never to be filled in?
 And was reality horrible after the dream? Were those tears the sobs wherewith
youth ever mourns the first touch of the cold water of experience? Life is so
icy, its practical lessons are so stern, that it is no marvel the young weep
shudderingly at the plunge, and look back through blinding tears regretfully
towards the bank which they can never regain. 
If George had spoken at random he had spoken truly, and truth always travels
straight home, for which reason Louisa fell on her knees and wept, crying over
her manuscripts such tears as unhappy mothers have sometimes cause to shed over their firstborn. 
If there had been joy in these things there was trouble likewise; if, after her
travail, she had rejoiced, so now, because of creations which she had brought
into the world, she mourned; and George was vainly essaying some word of
comfort, hopelessly racking his brain for sentences of consolation, when Beryl
came in, and took the office of soother upon herself. 
If George Geith had wanted anything more to make him in love with the girl, her
conquest would have at that moment been complete. Had the fire needed fuel
there would have been sufficient heaped on it at that moment to make its flames inextinguishable. 
There was a something so indescribably tender about the way she took her sister
(louisa) to her; it was so pitiful to see the two clinging to one another;
Beryl's sympathy was so true, her self-forgetfulness so real; the look in her
brown eyes, as she lifted them to George's face, so vexed and troubled, that
the accountant thought he had never seen so exquisite a home picture as that
pair of young creatures seated together on the ground, with arms twining round
waist and neck, with heads touching, with flowing dresses intermingling, and
lying in masses of light drapery over the dark green carpet. 
"Don't cry, dear; don't cry," was all the eldest (beryl) could find to say at
first; but as by degrees she gathered from George the cause of the outburst,
she murmured better words of comfort, and drawing, by some feminine chemistry,
every dark tint out of the future, presented it in such bright hues for
Louisa's inspection, that, as the clouds will clear off a child's face at sight
of a pleasant picture, her tears began to cease, and her sobs to grow less frequent. 
But she never raised her head from Beryl's shoulder; she never took her arms
away from clasping Beryl's neck; all the time she listened to the hopeful story
her sister whispered, she nestled close to a heart which seemed strong enough
and brave enough to bear its own sorrows and another's too. 
"Now, I wonder," thought George, "what Miss Molozane would have done had she
been here;" and he was just considering that the beauty (Matilda Molozane)might
not have shown herself in such an amiable light, when the door opened, and a
voice which he instantly recognized from Beryl's mimicry of it, exclaimed, in
tones of the most unequivocal surprise and indignation: 
"Well! I'm sure."

CHAPTER 24. MR RICHARD ELSENHAM.

 	At sound of the well-known voice, Beryl started to her feet with a suddenness
which almost threw Louisa on her face.
"Good gracious! grandmamma, how you did startle me," she cried, her cheeks all aglow. 
"How you have shocked me," retorted her virtuous relative. "Beryl, when will
you learn to conduct yourself like a young lady? Rise up, Louisa, and sit
properly upon a chair. What are you crying about? Dry your eyes this moment,
and  " with that stiffening of the back of which Beryl made such a point, "Who
is this gentleman, if I may inquire?"
"That gentleman is Mr Geith, Mrs Elsenham," said Beryl, who had by this time
recovered from her fright; "and  how did you come, grandmamma? how did you get
in? I never heard you. Have you seen Matilda?"
"I have seen no one but yourself," answered Mrs Elsenham. "The hall-door was
open; I knocked, I rang; but, as usual, no one attended to the summons. I went
into the drawing-room: it was empty. Then, hearing voices, I tried the library."
"I am very sorry," said Beryl, apologetically; "won't you come up-stairs now,
and take off your bonnet? I suppose Gibbs is with you?" And Beryl manuvred her
grandmother to the door, from which point she shot back a comical glance
towards George, who had remained standing from the time of Mrs Elsenham's
appearance. As for Louisa, at an early period she had effected her escape from
the room; and Beryl was left to meet the storm which she knew would be sure to
burst when once the door closed behind them. 
"Shan't I catch it?" said the look she cast towards George, as plainly as a
look could speak; and it would not be affirming too much to say that Beryl
rather enjoyed the idea of the scolding, which she intended to reproduce for
her friend's benefit at the earliest opportunity. 
For the young lady was perfectly indifferent to anything her grandmother chose to say to her. 
"Hard words break no bones," she remarked to George afterwards; "and I am,
thank goodness, too old now to have my ears boxed. How that respectable
relative of mine (maria elsenham) used to make them tingle!"
If scolding could have made them do so, Beryl's feelings need not have been
envied; but, as she remarked, "Such a trifling thing as her grandmother's
opinion produced no effect upon her."
On George, however, Mrs Elsenham's words of wisdom fell with the sharpness of
hail. Her worldly ideas came upon him like frost in summer; and when into his
Eden this ancient serpent entered, he felt that the sooner he got out of
Paradise the better it might be for him and every other person concerned. 
Not all Beryl's powers of mimicry could reconcile him to Mrs Elsenham's
peculiarities. The minutes which the young lady stole in order to tell him
Granny's "latest" could not make him feel other than perfect detestation for
the manner in which said Granny tracked Beryl's footsteps, and compelled her to
make ignominious and hurried retreats from the library on to the terrace. 
True, the minute Mrs Elsenham re-closed the door, Beryl's face re-appeared at
the window; and the hiding and seeking at which the pair played, the lurking
behind ivy and honeysuckles, and the triumphant flights which Beryl effected,
were amazingly amusing and exciting. During the whole of his life at the Dower
House, George Geith had never laughed so much as he did now at granddaughter
and grandmother.; but it was intolerable to have to laugh silently; and at
times when Beryl was within earshot, when her last sentence was scarcely
spoken, he found it almost impossible to reply to Mrs Elsenham's inquiries with
necessary gravity. What the lady suspected  whether she thought Beryl was
making love to him or he to Beryl; whether she guessed Beryl was ridiculing
her, or imagined she was making the accountant's stay too agreeable, George
could not decide; he only knew that Mrs Elsenham laid herself out to be
unpleasant, and that in this laudable design she succeeded to perfection. 
For to him her manner was insufferable. If he had been a servant, and necessary
to her comfort, or conducive to her convenience, she might have treated him
with some consideration and courtesy; but, as he happened only to be a man in
business, she missed no opportunity of letting him know his rung of the social
ladder was very near the ground. 
To George she was like a perpetual blister. It seemed as though she were trying
to enter a continual protest against his presence in the house, and the feeling
wherewith it pleased the owner thereof to regard him. Cordially he hated her,
her maid (Gibbs), and her dog, a nasty, snarling, cross-grained (King Charles
spaniel), that always had something the matter with its throat, which rendered
necessary external applications of oil, and the internal administration of cream. 
"I should like to put a stone round its neck," observed George to Beryl. 
"I shall kill it some day, I know," she replied; "and then if Granny can hang
me for wilful murder I shall die the death."
As for (old Mr Elsenham), senior, the gentleman who always travelled in his
sister-in-law's company, he was a perfectly unoffending personage, who took to
George amazingly, assured him he would get on, told him he had once been a City
man himself, and that he had made a deal of money. "A very great deal," he
added, champing his toothless jaws the while. "Ah! the City's the place, when
all's said and done  and the west is very nice, and the country is very
pleasant  give me the City."
And then the accountant wondered if this old man, who had money and leisure,
really would like to return to a dull City office, and pore over musty books. 
With the sunlight streaming over him, he forgot that the sun had almost done
shining anywhere for (old Mr Elsenham), and that he was looking back as he
spoke to days when even a City office seemed gay and cheerful; to days when he
was young, and life lay all before him. 
It was funny to notice how jealous Mrs Elsenham became of her kinsman's liking
for the accountant; how constantly she interposed her portly figure between
them; how frequently she bore Dives (old Mr Elsenham) off in triumph to read
good books to him, over which he fell asleep.
 Beryl's description of these readings, and of the way in which (old Mr
Elsenham) seized on any chance of escape from them, was irresistibly comic.
Indeed, what was there in those days that was not comic, save the state of Mr
Molozane's affairs, and the certainty that the accounts were nearly finished,
and that George's holiday was consequently almost ended? 
One other thing also, perhaps, was not ludicrous  a new phase of Mr Richard
Elsenham's character; one for which George Geith could have kicked him from
Withefell to London without wearying of the exercise, viz., getting dead drunk
when a suitable opportunity offered, and boasting in his cups that Beryl liked
him better than she liked anybody else on earth. 
"I'd have but to hold up my finger," he hiccupped, as he and George walked home
from Withefell, "and  she'd  come. Matilda's not my choice  d her  she's the
devil's; and if the devil (maria elsenham) was dead, and I had her money, I'd
have Beryl; and  " with an awful lurch, which nearly capsized his companion  "Beryl would have me."
"She would not," said George, provoked out of his silence. 
"She would," affirmed her admirer; "she likes me better than she does  Werne;"
and Mr Elsenham plumped down on the side-path, and commenced invoking blessings on his Beryl. 
"Get up, you brute!" exclaimed George, and he shook his companion, who,
catching his hand, began maundering  
"I'm sorry for you, old fellow; I like you; you're a trump. But you mistake;
you think Beryl likes you? she don't. I know Beryl, and I know  she's  a humbug."
Having vouchsafed which piece of information, Mr Elsenham fell back into the accountant's arms. 
"It would serve you right to leave you to sleep in the road," remarked Mr
Geith, while he endeavoured to steady his companion's steps. 
"Beryl will  marry  Werne," proceeded Miss Molozane's fianc; "when she can't
have me she'll take the highest bidder. If I'd the spirit of a mouse, I'd send
Matilda to the right-about, hang her, and take Beryl."
After this statement, Mr Elsenham began to sing "Lizzie Lindsay" at the highest
pitch of his voice. Whether it was that the thought of Lord Ronald Clanronald's
happiness proved too much for him, or that the idea of George Geith's misery
touched his heart, I do not know, but when he came to the last line of the
song, which states that the energetic young person whose adventures it records had gone off  
"His pride and his darling to be,"
Mr Richard Elsenham commenced whimpering, and took George entirely into his
confidence. "I'd rather see her your wife than Werne's," he said; "Werne would
not come home with me as you are doing; Werne would send his (werne's footman)
with a pair of cursed calves; Werne's a milksop; Werne's a saint; he does not
smoke, and if Beryl marries him I'll never go and see her, I'll cut her, I'll
disown her, I'll be if I don't."
The foregoing sentence, in which, as Dick Elsenham spoke it, every second word
was an oath, was jerked out by the drunken idiot as he staggered along the path
leaning on the accountant's arm. 
With what feelings George Geith listened to it  (I the narrator) think I need
not record; but as Dick proceeded to say that Beryl was only going to marry the
saint for an establishment, and that her father had put her up to it, and that
when she was mistress of the Park, Mr Werne would be nowhere, his companion
grew so furious that he could not help stopping short and shaking Mr Elsenham
till the young man had scarcely a breath left to draw. 
"If you can think of nothing good to say about your relations, for God's sake
hold your tongue," he exclaimed; "don't soil your cousin (beryl)'s name by
dragging it through the mire and dirt of your own nature; for if you do I'll
leave you to find your way back to the Dower House as best you can."
Whereupon Mr Elsenham became pathetic, and entreated George not to desert him. 
"I have nobody in the world," he wept, "and I'm fond of you; I love you like a brother."
"If you were my brother I'd thrash you till I was tired; I would certainly cure
you of making a beast of yourself."
"It  was  all  that  claret," explained Mr Elsenham; and he rambled on for some
time about the devilish good wine that snob (mr finch) had in his cellar, and
about what a grand thing it was for swells that there were snobs who were glad to entertain them. 
All the meanness and vulgarity of the man's nature revealed itself to George's
gaze during the course of that interminable walk; all his arrogance,
self-conceit, want of truth, and want of principle, were exhibited by Miss
Molozane's suitor (dick elsenham) for the accountant's benefit, and he was at
last provoked to say: 
"If your cousin has ever seen you like this, I don't wonder at her hating you."
"Hate me! she loves me; she sits up for me; Beryl likes the ground I walk on;
and I love Beryl; and she loves me. You thought, perhaps, she liked you, old
fellow, but that was only because we kept it  so close  so  dark."
After that George Geith held his peace. Out of the past there came to him the
proverbs once so familiar, "Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest he
be wise in his own conceit." "Speak not in the ears of a fool, for he will
despise the wisdom of thy words." "Though thou shouldest bray a fool in a
mortar among wheat with a pestle, yet will not his foolishness depart from him."
At the moment, (I the narrator) am afraid the accountant wished he had the
braying of that lump of folly, laziness, conceit, and arrogance, which he had
the felicity of escorting back to the Dower House, where, exactly as Mr
Elsenham had said, Beryl was sitting up for them.
"I told you so," said her cousin, with drunken gravity, propping himself up
against one corner of the hall, and shaking his head solemnly at George, who
could scarcely resist laughing at the figure the man presented. "Beryl ain't you  fond of me? "
"No, I am not," answered Beryl; "and if you do not go to bed at once I shall
tell Granny about you to-morrow."
"You may tell the  devil," retorted Mr Elsenham, and he thrust his hands into
his pockets, and surveyed his cousin with an idiotic smile. 
"Wait till tell you Beryl; we had sthunning  dinner and I made  myself  pleasant  to Miss Finch."
"I wish you were married to her," said Beryl, in an audible aside. 
"And Werne was there  and  con  dicted me  and if  you take him, Beryl, I'll 
never be friends with you  never."
At which stage, Mr Elsenham's hat, that had previously been very much on one
side, fell off; and whilst he was vainly attempting to pick it up, Beryl took
the opportunity of asking Mr Geith to get him to go to bed. 
It was by no means a difficult task, for being almost too tipsy to be
troublesome, he suffered George to help him upstairs, where, after a vain
attempt to pull off a very tight pair of boots, George left him to his fate. 
"Does Miss Molozane know?" the accountant could not help asking Beryl next morning. 
"Of course she does; she has seen him what he calls 'happy ' often enough. Oh!
indeed Dick is a very nice young man, and will make an admirable husband."
Which answer, and the indignant sarcasm of Beryl's manner as she spoke it,
caused Mr Geith to reflect, as he travelled from St Margaret's to London, that
it was a more difficult thing for girls to get married to their minds than he had once supposed.  
Given, for instance, the Molozanes. The two eldest (matilda) (beryl) could
certainly settle well if they chose; but then, would that settling be at all to
their satisfaction? He saw how hard it would be for them to meet with exactly
the suitable person. Situated as they were, they could scarcely hope to unite
love and competence, or competence and love. They might in one sense make great
matches, secure husbands who could at once raise them to affluence, and give
them every advantage to which their birth entitled them. The sets-off against
those matches were the impossibility of such girls really and truly loving the
husbands who thus endowed them with all manner of worldly possessions; the
differences of opinion and taste that would be certain to arise; and in
Matilda's case, the tortures, consequent on his vulgarity, to which she would
be subjected if she were to discard her cousin, and marry Mr Finch. 
That she had chosen that which she believed the lesser evil, George could well
understand; and although he now cordially detested Mr Richard Elsenham, he
could not but admit that perhaps, considering her nature, she had chosen wisely. 
But how would it be with Beryl? In all honesty, putting himself and his own
personal feelings out of the question, how would it fare with her if she married Mr Werne? 
Would she  could she  ever settle down into a suitable wife for a grave, good,
sensible man, for whom she did not feel one atom of affection? Would not the
dull, decorous life kill her? Would she not sicken of the poor, weary of her
wealth, die of the Sundays, despair through the week? Could she ever get fond 
really fond  of one so utterly her opposite? As she matured, if she ever did
mature, would not the gap widen? Would not he get more solemn  she more eager
for gaiety, more impatient of control? 
Would not that love which George felt satisfied she had to give to someone,
prove her curse sooner or later? 
But there George stopped. Beyond her marriage, if she did marry, there lay a
desert of years over which he never could fancy her light feet journeying.
 Just the same then, as previously, he found he could not imagine Beryl married  Beryl staid. 
For a moment he let himself try to picture his circumstances altered, and her
his wife; but he found he could not realize that. 
The only dream he was able to conceive true, was this: that for some reason or
other he might have always to be coming and going to and from the Dower House;
and that as he went and came he should always find Beryl here, and Beryl still the same. 
In that waking dream the summer was perpetual; he saw no dark wintry days, he
beheld no snow on the ground, no leafless trees tossing their branches to the
stormy sky. The fields were ever green, the waters were ever clear; the flowers
never faded; men and women never grew old. No sorrow entered into that vision;
no tears dimmed bright eyes; no warm hearts changed and grew cold; no tones
wearied; no harsh words were uttered; all faces wore perpetual smiles. 
There was no thought of parting, no mention of farewell; and the man, best
portion of whose life had been spent in facing all manner of stern realities,
gave himself up to the fascination of his dreams, and letting his sense sleep
whilst he perfected it, went wandering on through Elysian fields, till the
engine, rushing with a snort, and a shriek, and a whistle, into the Shoreditch
station, brought him back to the life which it was his duty and his interest to
live with all his energies awake.
 "Was I dreaming of heaven?" he thought, as he passed out with the crowd, and
walked down Bishopsgate Street, and thence across St Mary Axe, bearing steadily towards Fen Court. 
CHAPTER 25. BACK TO TOWN. 

It is curious that there should always be such a grievous quid placed against
the quo of even our most innocent pleasures; that so surely as a man leaves his
business and enjoys the shortest possible period of recreation, he should find
on his return things going wrong; disagreeable letters piled on his desk,
containing imperative demands from duns, announcements of suspensions, or
perhaps intelligence that some friendly neighbour has been doing his best to
damage his connection by going round to his customers, or tampering with his clients. 
Whether it is that the change from freedom to anxiety makes a man less fitted
to bear  these annoyances patiently, or that the troubles of every day, instead
of being met and cleared away before closing time each evening, are thus
accumulated in one formidable heap, (I the narrator) can scarcely tell; all I
know is, that the first day at home, or at office, after a long absence, is
detestable; it is a man's sorrowful return to school after the holidays; it is
extra lessons and additional punishments, from sunrise to sunset. 
George Geith found it disagreeable, at any rate, for he had been in town for a
few hours on the previous Friday, and now it was only Wednesday in the
following week; but still, in that short time, he discovered that business had
not been going well, and that he must never take so long a holiday for the future. 
Mr Foss was ill, to commence with; he had known that, but he had depended on
his other clerk (simmons) keeping close to the office, and attending to
customers, instead of which it appeared that his other clerk had taken holiday
too, and that all persons who climbed up to his door had been solaced with the
very definite information that he would "Return in an hour," which they derived
from a small card hung on the panel. How many customers had been offended
during his few days of absence? How many had come back at the expiration of an
hour, half-a dozen times, and then departed, never to return, it would be
useless to tell. Everything was wrong, everything in confusion. Letters that
ought to have been attended to were lying unopened; notices that should have
been seen to, were resting peacefully on his desk. 
Had he been at Fen Court during the whole of the previous week, it is more than
probable he would not have done a stroke of fresh business, but as he chanced
to be away, fresh business had poured in to be neglected. 
Hanging up his hat, and putting on his office coat, the accountant, without
wasting an unnecessary second in vain regrets, got to work. He was clear of the
Dower House now, and could work; and the amount of business he managed to get
through that morning proved a surprise even to himself. 
"So you're back at last," said Mr Bemmidge, opening the door of the inner
office, and greeting George with a grasp which made the accountant's fingers
tingle. "I was thinking of going down to see whether you were living or dead,
or if you were going to set up in business at that outlandish place where you've been staying."
"I have often been here, though you have not seen me," answered his friend (mr
bemmidge); "and I called at your office not ten days since; but your clerk said
you had gone to Brighton."
"So I had; Mrs B. and the children (bemmidge children) are all down there. I
ran down from Saturday till Monday. Lor' bless you, I can't take such holidays
as you do. I can't stay away for a month at a time, and only pay angels' visits
to my office. I was saying to my wife, Hertfordshire must surely hold some
great attraction for you. Eh! is that it?"
"The attraction of hard work," answered the hypocrite (george geith), "which is
enough to take me anywhere. And the worst of it is, the work is not finished
yet; and how I am ever to get it finished I do not know."
"Well, I must say you look as if the work had agreed with you," observed Mr
Bemmidge, stepping back in order to obtain a better view. "You are worth twenty
of the man you -were in the early part of the summer. If you want to insure
your life, now's the time."
"What should I want to insure my life for? I have neither kith nor kin."
"But it is never too late to repair that. We have all been expecting to hear of
your marriage this fortnight past. Mrs B. said she was certain  nothing but a
lady could be keeping you so long out of town."
"Which shows how little Mrs Bemmidge knows of me," replied George. "Years and
years ago I married business, and I have seen nothing, so far, that could make
me unfaithful to my choice nothing certainly in Hertfordshire;" and George
uttered this untruth with an appearance of the frankest sincerity.
"Well, I am glad you have had the change, at any rate; you look a hundred per
cent. the better for it; and I dare say you feel a new creature."
"It has certainly done me a great deal of good," George replied; "but health
has been purchased too dearly in this instance, I am afraid. Being out of town
has done my business harm."
"But you were at work in the country, you say?"
"Yes; but work in the country never pays like work in town. To be sure," added
George, carelessly, "it may bring new town work, for Mr Finch  Finch & Cross,
you know, of Fore-street  has promised to send me what business he can."
"Edward Finch" exclaimed Mr Bemmidge. "If you can get into his good books your fortune's made."
"And I have also met Mr Werne, head partner in that great druggist's house in
Little Britain; you know the firm I mean; and he says he can put a good deal in
my way, so that, altogether, perhaps my visit to Hertfordshire may not prove quite unproductive."
And George uttered this sentence, looking straight into Mr Bemmidge's face, and
speaking as if during the entire time of his absence he had never spared a
thought for anything but business.
 Heavens! what deceivers we are! How calmly we go on cheating ourselves and our
neighbours, till even those who know us best can hardly tell which part of our
lives is true and which false. Had Beryl Molozane heard George Geith talking to
his friend, she would really have fancied all he had thought of at the Dower
House was his fee, and extending his connection; and she would have turned away
heartsick at the idea, that all their pleasant hours he had deemed wasted; that
all their happy holiday was considered unproductive, save in so far as it
brought him into contact with two good City men (mr werne)(mr finch). 
As for Mr Bemmidge, he was enchanted to hear of the good company in which his
friend had found himself, and he had no hesitation in expressing his surprise
at how George had "got at them."
"There is no mystery in the matter," said the accountant; "Mr Werne is a
tenant, and Mr Finch a neighbour, of the gentleman for whom I have been doing
business (mr molozane). In this country, you know, great people are not so
inaccessible as they seem to be in the City."
"I wish I could meet with some of these nobs, and get a good order for wine out
of them," said Mr Bemmidge, perfectly unconscious that a sneer had lain hidden
in the last part of the accountant's sentence. 
"I wish you could, if it would help your balance at the end of the year," said
George; but he thought, as he spoke, of Mr Finch's wines, and felt assured Mr
Bemmidge's primest seals would not be given house-room. 
It had long been the accountant's opinion that his friend did not know good
wine from bad, and he could not help smiling as he contrasted the fearful
decoctions which Mr Bemmidge had pronounced first-rate, with the pure products
of choice vintages wherewith Mr Finch made expiation for his sins of grammar. 
"Something seems to be amusing you," said Mr Bemmidge, with the air of a man
ready to take his share of a joke. 
"I was thinking of Mr Finch," answered the accountant, "he is an oddity, if
ever there was one, and his sister (miss finch) I think is odder still."
"Would she suit?" asked Mr Bemmidge significantly.
 "I do not know what she might have done thirty years ago," was the reply, "but
she certainly would not now."
"That's a pity, but at any rate you seem to have been in luck's way," remarked
the wine merchant; "I wish I could get such a chance."
"Perhaps you may, some day; and, as I said before, there need be some profit,
for there has been much loss. There's a confoundedly annoying thing to find
lying for one," he added, picking up a letter, which he handed to Mr Bemmidge,
who first read it through attentively, and then agreed that it was annoying. 
"If they begin to make objections about discounting," proceeded Mr Geith, "I
must shift my account, for it would play the deuce with me to have to refuse
bills, and I must refuse them if I cannot get them passed to my credit before
they are due. With an extending business too, like mine, the matter becomes very serious indeed."
"London bankers are Herods," said Mr Bemmidge; "they strangle all the young
businesses they can lay their hands on. The fact is, that in another generation
or two, there will be no small traders at all. Every business will belong to a
millionnaire or a company, and men like ourselves will have to be clerks or porters."
"It will be a bad day for England," observed George, "when she sees the last of
her middle men." And he felt desperately democratical as he spoke. 
"You would think," went on Mr Bemmidge, "that the bankers here were sworn
together to prevent an honest, struggling man rising. There was a merchant in
the office the other day, from Ireland, and he asked me what the London banks
were established for. 
"I told him I did not know, unless it was to help the rich to rob the poor.
'What do you think they are for?' "said I. "'Faith, and I don't know,' said he,
'for the devil another thing can I see that they keep open for, except to have
crossed cheques paid through them.'"
"And he was right," observed George Geith, sulkily, "they won't discount; they
won't advance. I had a cheque returned to me in the spring with N.S. on it,
when I was only two pounds short, and had paid in the day before a couple of
hundreds in post bills and country orders."
"What a shame!" remarked Mr Bemmidge. 
"It was a shame," agreed Mr Geith, "and it might have done me no end of harm
had it happened with anybody else than the person it did. I will do the (bank
manager) the justice to say he apologized, and said if he had known about the
post bills he would have had them placed to my credit; but then, as I told him,
a bank that is so infernally strict, ought to have people in it who know
everything; and that if their particularity had damaged me, his regret would
not have done much good. Keep a balance, indeed! not if I know it. I can employ
my capital to a vast deal more advantage in my business than by keeping it shut
up in their bank; besides, they would. not discount beyond the balance kept,
and I might, therefore, just as well cash my own bills, and pocket the discount."
And George, who was by this time very hot and angry, flung down one of the windows with a bang. 
"If you like to change your bank, and keep a balance, I can tell you a place
where they will discount good paper to any amount," said Mr Bemmidge. "Nortons'
in Size Lane. They are old-fashioned people, and have an old-fashioned
connection; but if you want a really comfortable, respectable bank, you could
not beat Nortons' in London: I banked there as long as I could keep a balance,
and old Mr Norton is a man you can go and talk to like a father."
Here was a prospect! One which in this busy world of London is not often
presented before a man! To have any person to whom one could go and talk to
like a father was wonderful; but for that individual to be a banker took away
George's breath, and he answered somewhat incredulously that for his part he
could never look upon a banker as anything but his natural enemy. 
"Oh! yes you could, if you saw Mr Norton," returned the wine merchant, calmly;
"he is a perfect gentleman of the old school, you would be charmed with him."
"I might, but I am very doubtful," said George; "what balance do they require you to keep?"
"Five hundred." At which intelligence Mr Geith uttered an exclamation of dismay. 
"Well, you know it is the usual thing," remarked Mr Bemmidge, "and then it
don't matter how much paper you put in, so long as it is good, and to bank with
Nortons' is in itself a letter of credit to City people. I only wish I could
get back to them," sighed the wine merchant, and knowing the state of his
pass-book, his friend could well believe his assertion. 
"And if one wanted to open an account there, how are they to be got at?" asked
Mr Geith, "for I know I had trouble enough before I was privileged to draw
cheques on the Merchant's and Tradesman's. It is almost as hard to get into a
bank as what it is to compass the Kingdom of Heaven," and George began beating
a tattoo on his desk, a sure sign with him of increased anger and impatience.
"I'll introduce you, if you like," said Mr Bemmidge; "although I don't bank
there, Norton still speaks to me in the street."
"What condescension," remarked the accountant. 
"Well, you know, Geith, it is thought condescension in Lon don for a banker to
do anything of the kind; and he and I used to be very good friends; and I know
he will take my word for your respectability, though I am only in a small way;
so, if you make up your mind to close with the Merchant's and Tradesman's, I'll
go down with you any time you like to Size Lane, and tell Mr Norton who and
what you are. I suppose I need not say that Nortons' is a respectable bank."
"Indeed, you need not, I know Nortons are tip-top people, my gentry clients'
cheques are as often drawn on them as on Coutts, and if you can go down with me
now, we will settle the matter at once."
"But about the balance, Geith?" suggested the wine merchant timidly. 
"I happen to have six hundred, which was paid to me since I came in, and I take
the funds being provided as a sign I am to change my bankers."
"What a business you must be doing," remarked poor Mr Bemmidge, whose mouth
watered at sight of the cheque. 
"Yes, I am doing pretty well, considering," answered the accountant, as he
changed his coat and brushed his hat preparatory to sallying forth. 
The six hundred was trust-money, which might be needed any day, but George did
not think it necessary to tell Mr Bemmidge everything; indeed it was part of
the man's nature to keep silence. Even from the friend of his heart and the
wife of his bosom, had he possessed either, he must have withheld a full and
free confidence. In this respect he was the making of a true man of business
before he ever entered trade; and business, and long years of loneliness, and
the constant habit of reserve, had all tended to make George Geith as
uncommunicative a man, (I the narrator)  mean with regard to his own affairs,
as need have been looked for in the length and breadth of London.
 His was a singular kind of reserve, however, being of an exceedingly annoying
and deceptive nature. 
There are some people who are, one knows, keeping things back, telling nothing,
constantly putting their thoughts, plans, wishes, hopes, fears, under lock and
key; and for these individuals one is prepared and willing to let them go on
their own way till the end of the chapter. There are others again, who, though
sealed books to most, are perfectly frank and unreserved towards a few; who can
tell a story, if they commence to tell it at all, straight through without any
lie, or mental reservation; whilst a third class appear to be candid, and yet
are always hiding away something from their nearest and dearest. 
Like Ananias and Sapphira  making the comparison with all reverence  they
profess to be giving all whilst they keep back a part; they play with
everything which is holiest and purest in humanity, with its sympathies, its
trust, its yearning for perfect confidence; and because George Geith did this,
because, whilst making believe to bestow, he was secretly with holding, (I the
narrator) call his peculiarity a sin; this phase of his character, detestable. 
From a business point of view, perhaps it was a light thing to pass off as his
own six hundred pounds, one penny of which did not belong to him. 
It might be a venial fault in that instance, but George carried the same thing
with him into every circumstance of his life, and was false about trifles when
he might just as easily have been true. 
He was not particular about the genuineness of his excuses when excuses were
needed; he did not care about a gloss being false, provided it served his
purpose; and accordingly he felt no prickings of conscience as he put on his
coat and brushed his hat, about having implied an untruth to Mr Bemmidge. 
The money was his pro tem., and he would take advantage of having it, to
transfer his account to another bank, where he could soon get sufficient paper
"melted" to borrow an expression from Mr Foss  to set him square. 
"Nothing venture, nothing have," had for long been George Geith's motto; and
yet he was not rash. He was not even speculative. He never threw down his
stakes on the chance of a particular colour turning up; rather, he had the
cards, and played them boldly and rapidly.
To keep the business ball constantly moving had been his aim for years; and to
be thwarted in this laudable endeavour by the perverseness of a banker was more
than his temper could bear.
"An honest tradesman," he remarked to Mr Bemmidge, "has to be content to see
his two or two and a half per cent.; but whom these banks rob to pay the
dividends they do, is a mystery to me. I should like to have the overhauling of
some of their books; I wonder what holes I should be able to pick out in them."
And so he fumed and fretted whilst the pair walked along Fenchurch Street, and
thence to the Merchant's and Tradesman's, where George paid the six hundred in
with a certain air of triumph and sense of victory. 
Afterwards he accompanied Mr Bemmidge to Size Lane, in which cheerful locality
Nortons' bank had been established for upwards of a century. 
Externally, the bank was dingy; internally, it was dirty. Further, it was dark,
small, and unimposing. At the Merchant's and Tradesman's all was plate-glass,
frescoes, mouldings, handsome flooring, elaborate ceilings. Behind counters,
the highly-polished mahogany whereof shone like a mirror, were ranged rows of
clerks, who made themselves as generally disagreeable as it was in the power of
bank clerks to do; and in remoter regions, separated by glazed partitions from
the vulgar herd, was the sanctum of the (bank manager)  a gentleman who united
the conciliating manners of a bear with the appearance of a fop. 
In Size Lane, how different! Through a narrow doorway the visitors squeezed
themselves into the bank, which was dark even in the summer-time, by reason of
unclean windows, dingy walls, a pervading presence of green baize, and absence
of even the most ordinary cleanliness. Spiders loved Size Lane; they spun their
cobwebs undisturbed in the corners of Nortons' bank; they caught flies till
their nets became such perfect sepulchres that they were forced to build fresh
cities for themselves and families. 
The dust of years lay thick on the shelves; ink, spilled by generations of
clerks, stained the desks and floor. The once green baize, which covered the
door leading off to Mr Norton's private room, had faded to a yellowish brown;
the short curtains, suspended from brass rods, that served to hide the three
clerks from too curious observation, were of any colour but red; whilst the
brass rods might well have passed for bronze. 
It was generally understood about the establishment that the floor was scrubbed
once a week; but if this were so, the boards certainly proved ungrateful for
the pains bestowed upon them.
Mr Geith thought he had never set his foot in a dirtier place; but there was an
air of money about it, an appearance of there being such plenty at the owners'
backs that they could afford to dispense with the modern adjuncts of decent
furniture, cleanliness, and light, which went far to impress the accountant in
favour of his new bankers. 
We are all a little apt to think that where there is much glitter there can be
no gold, that the more ragged the miser's dress the larger and deeper must be
his money-chests. Though he had seen enough of life, one would have thought, to
get rid of these prejudices, George Geith was still swayed by them, and entered
Mr Norton's reception-room in a contented state of mind. 
Somewhat awkwardly Mr Bemmidge performed the ceremony of introduction, and then
retired into total silence, leaving his friend to talk to Mr Norton as he might
to a father, if he could.
 Which he could not. Spite of the man's suavity, his courtesy, his pleasure at
seeing them, his interesting remarks on the weather, and his readiness to
receive him as a client, the accountant did not like Mr Norton. 
"He makes my flesh creep," he remarked to Mr Bemmidge as they got out once
again into the sunshine. "Good heavens! did you hear with what gout he gave the
account of that poor fellow's arrest? I declare, when he laid his hand on my
shoulder, I felt inclined to get up and fight him. He's a hypocrite, Bemmidge;
I'm sure he is. Spite of all his nonsense about their consideration for the
(father of arrested man), and pity for the son, he had not an atom of
compassion for either of them. Why could he not have paid the money, and hushed
up the matter? The old scoundrel, he could well have afforded it, I'll be bound."
"It was confoundedly sharp practice," said Mr Bemmidge, with a troubled face.
"Mr Geith, I knew that young fellow once; he was as nice a lad as you would
wish to see; and the (father of arrested man) is a very respectable man, doing
a good small trade in the Borough."
"I think I shall go and hear the trial; "and as he wended his way back to Fen
Court, George, after parting from his friend, went over all the circumstances
of the interview, and found that the more he thought about Mr Norton, the less he liked him. 
The banker (mr norton) was a man of about the middle height, but so thin and
wiry and erect, that he looked considerably taller than was actually the case.
He had a long nose, thin lips, clear blue eyes, that looked a person through
and through, and the quietest, most conciliating manners that ever a man made capital out of. 
He was an individual whose affability might easily win the heart of a stranger
in an inferior station, and whose quiet respect would suit people of a rank
equal or superior to his own. "Any relation to the Great Snareham Geiths," he
had paused to ask, when George, at his request, repeated the name; and to this
question the accountant replied in the affirmative. 
"We have had some business with the next presumptive heir, Mr Arthur Geith,"
remarked the banker, "or perhaps I ought to say, with Mrs Arthur Geith. There
are not many of the original family left now, I believe. There was once a clergyman?"
George believed there was.
 "Do you know if anything has been heard of him lately?" 
The accountant was afraid there had not; and, as he said this, he and the
banker (mr norton) looked hard at one another, and came to an understanding on the spot. 
"What took me there? was it chance, or was it fate? or do our lives move in
circles, which bring us ever round and round to the same point again? Am I,
after all these years, returning to my family, and to people who know them?
Will that old man go and say that I was a clergyman, that I am an accountant?
Will he go and wonder why I left the Church, and talk on the subject before my
face? And moved by the old strong agony, an agony which he thought he should
never have had to encounter more, George covered his face with his hands, and
looked back over the toil of years, out of the independence of the present to
the past which had held so much misery for him. 
Then humbly, and with a changed expression from that his features had borne
when he went out, he thanked God that his enemy, his relentless enemy, was
dead; that no untiring feet were searching him out; that he lived now in no
dread of one who might be following behind him, waiting to lay hand on his
shoulder, and make his flesh creep.
CHAPTER 26. DAY DREAMS. 
It was some days before George Geith was able completely to shake off the
disagreeable recollections which his interview with the banker (mr norton) had revived.
For so long a time he had forgotten the past, that to have it suddenly
reproduced before him was like waking from calm sleep and pleasant dreams to
the memory of some grievous trouble which has been forgotten during slumber. 
In the happiness of a recent present, the past of long ago, with its
temptations, which he had not resisted; with its allurements, which had
successfully enticed him; with its sorrows, which he had not encountered
manfully; with its shame, which he dreaded to face, had all gone down among
those dead memories which we are forced to entomb in our hearts. 
He had hidden their sepulchres away even from his own sight. He had hung roses
and garlands over them, and for gotten there were graves below. He had strewed
flowers, fresh flowers, gathered for him by the hands of the living, over the
bodies he had coffined. He had looked out over a new existence, and found it to
be very lovely; and behold! just as he was going out to greet it, there came a
general resurrection, and the woes and griefs put aside, as he thought for
ever, trooped back with ghastly faces to meet him on the threshold of a happier life. 
Was it chance, accident, coincidence, or fate? he asked himself, as he thought
over the matter calmly. Was it a warning? Pooh! what did he care if all the
world knew he had been a clergyman; that he had forsaken the Church for very
good and sufficient reasons? 
Supposing those reasons were posted up on the Royal Exchange, what would be the
harm? If the story of his boyish folly which had entailed such an estate of
labour and sorrow on his early manhood, could be suppressed, well and good; but
if through any accident it was made public, why, well and good still. 
In fact, if people generally came once to understand that he had been a
clergyman, he thought it would be better for them also to understand why he had
relinquished his profession: but, after all, where was the necessity for him to
be annoying himself by conjuring up possibilities? Who was going to tell
anything about him? Who knew anything about him for certain? Was he not taking
fright at shadows? starting at the rustling of straws? 
If Mr Norton did suspect, what then? Supposing he communicated his suspicion to
Mrs Arthur Geith, what then still? Sir Mark and Lady Geith knew of his
whereabouts; what therefore could it signify whether or not all the other
members of his family were made acquainted with it? Let the past go down into
the deep; and George tied stones about its neck and flung it once again into
the waters of oblivion. 
The certain advantages of banking with Norton of Size Lane, soon made him
forget the unpleasant impression left on his mind by his first interview with
the head of the firm. It was like a little capital to him, having his bills
payable at such a first-class bank. Drawing his cheques on Norton gave him a
certain standing amongst his clients; and though George knew it was all humbug;
though he knew his bills would in reality have been just as good paper if
Aldgate Pump had been written on them, he still was glad to be able to fall in
with popular ideas, and endeavoured to humour popular prejudices to the fullest extent.
 It occurs to me (I the narrator), at this point, that the reader may want to
know what an accountant could possibly have to do with acceptances; why he
should ever have required to make a bill of his own payable anywhere? To which
inquiry (I the narrator) may safely answer that there is scarcely a business
man in London the aim and object of whose life is not to get his acceptances into circulation. 
Bills are to the trader precisely what notes are to the banker  pieces of paper
which it is supposed represent a given amount of locked-up capital; and which
enabled him to do four times the business it would otherwise be possible for
him to adventure, if he were always compelled to wait until his money was free 
until he had cash in hand wherewith to purchase and to speculate.
 Bills are the long credits business accords to her favourite children, and
indeed it is the abuse of this privilege rather than its use which makes the
habitual practice of bill-issuing to stink in the nostrils of prudent and honest men. 
Ready money is best, they whisper; pay cash, they entreat; and the advice would
be excellent if in London people ever had ready money; if they ever had the
cash wherewith to pay; if business men had not always money locked up in goods
which it would be loss and ruin for them to attempt to realize. 
The danger of bills is, that men are tempted so often to issue paper beyond the
amount of their actual capital; in which case, should the venture in which they
are engaged not turn out well, bankruptcy inevitably follows. There was no fear
of George Geith falling into this error, however; for if he did speculate a
little outside his legitimate business, he speculated warily. Up to the time of
his emancipation, he had steadily resisted the allurements of possibilities.
Let an undertaking look ever so fair, he had passed on the other side, and
refused to touch it. He was afraid to risk a sixpence on any venture, let it
look as promising as it would; and, therefore, up to the time when you, my
reader, first made his acquaintance, he had been simply and purely an accountant  nothing more.
 Once free, however, once he had realized the fact that his earnings were his
own, to do what he liked with, that he had no further need to lay by for a
special object, for one sole end, he began to look about for secure
investments, for safe speculation, whereby he might hasten the process of
money-making, and add hundred to hundred with greater rapidity than had hitherto been the case. 
The great evil of his own business he had found to be, its entire dependence on
his own exertions. In it there was no casting of seed into the ground, and then
leisure till the harvest; no sending forth of vessels, and idleness till their
white sails reappeared in the offing. Ill or well, if his business were to
succeed, he must be at his post. Whether tired or not, he must still continue
that weary reckoning up of columns, that never-ending addition, that constant
calculation which in time wears out the strongest constitution, and weakens the
perceptions of the clearest head. Even to himself George Geith could not deny
but that the toil had told, that the business chains had worn down into his
flesh, and that but for his holiday he might not have been able to continue at
the same pace the race with fortune which for years he had been running. 
For which reason he turned his attention towards increasing his capital still
more quickly, and, together with one of his clients, a man of experience and
high business standing, speculated in such colonial products as seemed the
safest venture and promised the quickest returns. 
And now the accountant began to do amazingly well. In all businesses it is the
first step which costs. Once that step is made successfully, the rest, to an
energetic and sensible man, is easy; and George Geith was both. Beyond all
things he was practical, for he had no visions of a great future to be secured
by any means, save that of hard and unceasing work. 
He did not speculate in order to sit down idle; he merely did so to accelerate
his progress upwards, and to enable him to vary his occupation. 
Figures! Sometimes now he grew dizzy after he had been calculating for hours;
and he knew enough of man's physical constitution, and had heard enough of evil
resulting to others from inattention to such symptoms, to induce him to turn
his thoughts to some business which would not tax his brain so much as did that of an accountant. 
Merely as an accountant, however, he was doing remarkably well: (george's
clients) trooped in, one after another. Mr Finch was as good as his word, and
Mr Werne perhaps a little better; for both of which reasons George soon found
himself rising into note. 
From the moment that he began to bank at Nortons', fortune seemed never weary
of showering prizes upon him. Everything he touched turned out prosperously. He
made money, as Mr Foss phrased it, "like dirt;" and, sitting in his office in
Fen Court, looking out on the trees, the leaves of which were now brown and
withering, it might be that some vision of future wealth, of a happy home, of a
wife like Beryl Molozane, began to float vaguely before him. 
Separated from her, fearful that in the time to come he should never again be
domesticated in that dear old house, the same as he had been in the days that
seemed so far and far away, he began to understand that life without Beryl
would to him be lifeless, that money would be valueless, that the future would
be dark and barren; whilst, give him wealth and Beryl, a fair business, a
pleasant country house  and the Queen on her throne would be less happy than
the accountant of Fen Court. 
A country house, like the Dower House, only nearer town; Beryl young, Beryl
gay, Beryl something from which no man had the right to separate him; Beryl to
greet him, Beryl to talk to him, Beryl to love him; good heavens, what a
prospect! A home without sickness, without shadow, without anxiety; a home with
a south aspect, into which the sun shone even in the winter; a home where
flowers were always blooming, where there was no vulgarity, no shortness, no
worrying about servants, no living beyond their means, no keeping up of
appearances; nothing but peace, and joy, and comfort, and welcoming smiles and
sunshine! Whenever George Geith laid down his pen, and looked out at the backs
of the houses in Cullum Street, (I the narrator) think he did not see the
gloomy walls that encircled the graveyard, but rather the Dower House, with its
glory of roses, its wealth of beauty, and Beryl standing beside him in its old
fashioned garden, his for life! 
Painted on the blackened walls, he beheld this picture; day by day, as money
came in faster, as business kept on increasing, it grew more real to him.
Above the graves, behind the trees, he could see the glory of that ideal home;
and he never thought  have pity on the dreamer!  that over tombs he should have
to travel to find it; that weeping scalding tears, stumbling over bones,
groping amongst dust and ashes, he should in future years have to pass solitary
through earth, looking for the rest to come!
Oh dreams! oh visions! oh fair illusions and enchanting hopes! does earth hold
aught more mournful than the memory of your unfulfilled promises? 
Sadder than dead children are they to our thoughts. Can we ever coffin and bury them?
Can we ever forget that these dream sons and daughters, for whom there is no
resurrection, have been with us and are departed; that their dear faces have
smiled upon us, and may return, to lighten the darkness of our onward path, no more. 
CHAPTER 27. ALTERNATIONS. 

It must not be imagined, that whilst George Geith was dreaming dreams and
seeing visions, he neglected any part of his business; more particularly that
portion of it which had connection with Mr Molozane. 
On the contrary, he worked assiduously, and made haste to thread the mazes of
figures he had brought away from the Dower House, in order to put them into
some sort of intelligible form in town. When he had accomplished this feat, it
had been arranged he was to run down to Withefell again, and let Mr Molozane
know the best or the worst by word of mouth rather than by letter.
Having premised which fact, it is scarcely necessary for me to add that no
grass grew under the accountant's feet whilst he cut and pruned Mr Molozane's affairs into shape. 
He had long known what the result must prove, and yet when all was finished,
when the debit and credit lay before him. when the balance-sheet, in which
there appeared no balance, was ready for presentation to his employer, George
Geith hesitated and grew cowardly. 
He would rather any hand but his had to strike the blow; any tongue beside his
own to tell the poor, proud gentleman (mr molozane) there was no hope, that the
disease was past remedy, the cancer too deep for any surgeon's knife to cure. 
It seemed so likeingratitude for him to announce inevitable ruin, for one who
had been made so welcome, who had been so unutterably happy at the Dower House,
to assure the owner (mr molozane) he must leave it, and earn his own and his
children's (beryl) (matilda) (louisa) bread as best he might! 
To sensitiveness, to over-delicacy in regard of others' feelings, George Geith
could lay no claim; but he felt there would be something almost brutal in
forcing such news on any man, and accordingly he laid by the papers when they
were completed, and deferred making his communication, until a letter from Mr
Molozane left but one course open for him, which was to go to the Dower House
and tell the man who had been kind to him, that the accounts were correct, and
that he was  a beggar! 
And as he arrived at this inevitable conclusion, the wind swept mournfully
through the branches of the trees in the churchyard, and with sobs and moans
stripped the withered leaves off the branches and strewed them on the graves. 
Winter comes to all things created, that live long enough to feel its frosts.
Snow veils the greenest fields, ice binds the clearest streams, the rain and
the wind beat down the heads of the fairest flowers, and the leaves of June's
roses lie rotting on the earth, when November fogs succeed to the summer sunshine. 
Winter comes to all things earthly. It came and dwelt even in the gardens at
the Dower House, and when George Geith went down into Hertfordshire again, he
found that the leaves were off the trees, and that the flowers were withered
and gone, that the roads where the dust had lain thick were now deep in mud,
and that the fields, wherein the first breath of a new life had touched his
cheek, were sopping and soaking with wet. 
Nevertheless, it was to the Dower House he was journeying, and even had the
snow lain thick on the ground, had frost and ice chilled the blood in his
veins, George Geith would not have cared, providing always each step he took
brought him nearer and nearer to the dear old home.
 Where on his arrival he found no visitors stopping, and the same cordial
welcome as ever for himself. Blazing fires in the rooms in lieu of the former
sunshine without, closed windows and doors instead of the open-air life he
remembered. What then? it was still home to George Geith; winter does not chill
warm hearts, or change frank natures, and the Dower House in November held for
this man of business the same rich treasures as it had contained in July. 
And yet he could see a difference, not towards himself, but in the inmates.
Miss Molozane seemed less at ease than formerly, Beryl a trifle graver, Louisa
more womanly, Mr Molozane  but here George's heart failed him, the man appeared
to have a prevision of what was coming, and to have nerved himself to meet the
worst. And what a worst it was! Looking from the warmth of the Dower House to
the cold and damp without, contrasting the calm of that sheltered haven with
the storms and tempests of the outer world, George Geith felt that he might in
one way just as well have brought a warrant for execution in his hand as the
statement which confirmed all the worst fears they had ever entertained, which
virtually contained for Mr Molozane notice of ejectment from the last piece of
ground he might ever call his. 
But the truth had to be told, and after dinner, when he and his host sat over
their wine, he explained exactly how affairs stood, and proved that the first
call of the Sythlow Mines would bring matters to a crisis. Laying his papers on
the table he pointed out the meaning of the different entries to Mr Molozane,
who, after a moment's scrutiny, pushed the documents aside, and then said, with a weary sigh: 
"It has turned out as I expected then, as I feared," and he rose and walked up
and down the room once or twice, as though struggling with an emotion which he
did not wish George to witness.
 He had expected, he had feared, but here was certainty, and certainty is
always harder to endure than dread. 
"What am I to do? "he broke out at last, "where am I to go? what is to become
of my girls? Oh! those cursed mines; if I had only the money now I vested in
the shares, I could live, we could live here comfortably."
"You derive no income, no small income, I mean, from any other source?" asked the accountant. 
"None; you see exactly how I stand; you know as much about my affairs as I do
myself. Matilda will marry her cousin (dick elsenham), so she is, I may say,
provided for; but the other two (louisa) (beryl) have nothing, nor the chance
of anything;" and he sat down again and looked at the fire, whilst George held his peace.
"I must work, I suppose," began Mr Molozane, after a pause; but who would have
me? who would find any use for such a person as myself? I might be an agent, or
land steward, or bailiff, to be sure. We could live on little  we have lived on
little; and, oh! my God, it is very hard that that little should be taken from us."
At which point the poor gentleman's voice broke; and, as the firelight shone on
his face, George could see the big tears coursing one another down his cheeks. 
"I must get Matilda married," he at length resumed, "and then decide on some
future course. If it wasn't for the girls, I should not care. I could bear it,
if it was only myself;" and he seized the papers with trembling hands, and
began examining the items once again eagerly. 
"If one knew what the calls would amount to," said George, merely by way of saying something. 
"But we do not; and if we did, it could not make any difference to me,"
answered Mr Molozane. "No, I must get Tilly married, and then think  decide on
what will be best to do."
Was he wondering whether another daughter might marry, and enable him to keep
the Dower House? George Geith marvelled. In a moment the accountant ran over a
list of possibilities, a proposal, an acceptance, an arrangement of Mr
Molozane's affairs, a grant of the Dower House to that gentle man for life. 
Could he blame the father and daughter if his ideas turned out to be correct?
Could he say Beryl was wrong, or Mr Molozane, or any one? Could he even,
although he loved the girl himself, wish her to do otherwise? for what could he
give her beyond a small competence? How could he help either her father or
Louisa? Wherein was he superior to Mr Werne, who could place Beryl high above
all chance of want, who could make her mistress of the Molozanes' old property,
who could smooth every hour of her father's life, and give the girl herself
wealth, position, comfort? 
Could he blame her? With the death-bells of his own happiness tolling in his
ears, George Geith felt he could not; that it would be strange if Beryl did not
marry Mr Werne; and that the person who stepped in and tried to prevent her
doing so, would have much to answer for, if he succeeded in his endeavour. 
Looking alternately into the fire, and at the man who sat gazing hopelessly at
the blaze, the accountant resolved to forget his own dreams, and to resign
himself to a future which he believed inevitable. 
From the days of Jephtha had not daughters been sacrificed for their parents?
and should not the practice be followed at Molozane Park? Further, was it a
sacrifice? If there were not much love, was there not an infinite quantity of
respect? Did she care for anyone else? Could not Mr Werne give her everything
for which the heart of woman longs? Would not twelve months transform Miss
Beryl Molozane into a very con tented and charming Mrs Werne? and if so, why
not? Let them marry and be happy, what did it signify to him? Which rational
questions he put to his own heart just as Mr Molozane suggested that coffee was
most probably ready. 
"And, remember, Mr Geith, I do not want the girls to know anything of this," he
said. "It will be time enough for them to learn the worst when the crash comes."
In an instant George was out at sea again. If temporal salvation lay in Mr
Werne's hands, why should Beryl not be taught to understand that such was the
case, and instructed to play her cards accordingly? Or was it all acting? 
For which suspicion the accountant hated himself next moment; hating himself
still more when he looked at Beryl's guileless face, which was thinner than
formerly, and paler, as he thought, too. 
"You have brought bad news," she said to Mr Geith, seizing a moment when it was
possible to speak without being overheard."
"I have brought no news of any kind," he answered. 
"You have brought, then, a confirmation of my fears the Park must go."
"I cannot tell at all what Mr Molozane may do."
"You treat me like a child like a baby like an idiot," she said impatiently,
and left him in a pet. 
Next morning, however, before his departure, she was at his side again,
coaxing, entreating to be told exactly how matters stood. 
"I shall hate you if you refuse," was the last shot she fired. 
"Pray do not do that," he answered, sadly. "At any rate let us part friends,
for it is just possible I may never see you again."
"Never see us again? Where are you going? To China  India  New Zealand?"
"No; I shall still be in London, but my work here is finished; and though I
shall never forget the Dower House, it is unlikely that I shall ever have to visit it more."
"Why not?" asked Beryl; "do you never go to see anyone except on business?"
"Very rarely."
"And do you mean to say you would not come to see us?"
"I should like to come," he said, with a not unnatural hesitation; "but I
should not like to intrude."
"Intrude! nonsense," exclaimed the young lady; "I know papa was going to ask
you to be present at Tilly's marriage. He will want some Christian to talk to
after it, unless Granny sends him out of his mind between this and that. I
think I never did detest Granny so much as while she was here last; I had a
bonfire when she left. Will you come to the wedding, Mr Geith?"
"If I may  if I am asked."
"If you are asked," she repeated with a pout; "as if you were likely not to be
asked. It is to be early in the year. Dick was of age a fortnight since, and
Granny wanted the marriage to take place immediately; but papa said he should
like us to spend one more Christmas together before she went."
Whereupon George began to wonder whether he should be invited to spend his
Christmas at the Dower House, or whether he should have to pass it, as best he
could, in Fen Court. Of Christmas at Holloway he had already had sufficient,
and more than sufficient, but Christmas at the Dower House! If they would but
ask him, the invitation would make him happy through all the dull days of
November, through all the dark, dreary days of December. Was it likely Mr
Molozane would say anything on the subject before he went away? or would he
wait till nearer the time, and then write? Or would he never think about him at all? 
"How I wish I knew for certain," thought the accountant; and the idea kept him
in a fever all the time he was in the house  all the way to St Margaret's, to
which place Mr Molozane accompanied him, and up almost to the moment the train was due. 
"I intend," was the last sentence of his host, which George Geith subsequently
remembered, "to put this matter totally aside for the present. Sufficient for
the day  you know, Mr Geith  and I fancy when my trouble does come, it will
prove sufficient for me. Meantime, I will not make the present wretched, by
looking forward into the future. I should like to spend one more happy
Christmas in the old place; and if you have no better engagement, or if no
better engagement should present itself to you, I hope you will join our party.
We have not much to offer besides a welcome, but that is at your service."
What the accountant said in reply, it would be difficult for me to put on
paper. He only knew himself afterwards, that he had accepted the invitation,
and that the train which bore him back to London at the funereal pace which
trains on the Eastern Counties line at that time affected, seemed to him a
fairy car floating far above all sublunary cares and projects. 
The man was hopelessly, senselessly, if you will, in love; and the idea that
Beryl was not lost to him, that Beryl liked him, that Beryl's father (mr
molozane) wished to have him staying in his house, transported him into the
seventh heaven of happiness, and sent him back to town to work with redoubled
vigour; to serve a far more capricious and uncomfortable god than Mammon,
before whom, but for his acquaintance with Beryl Molozane, he would still have
been grovelling in the dust.
CHAPTER 28. CHRISTMAS EVE. 

In the year of grace of which (I the narrator) am writing, Christmas came to
every home in Britain in the garb which all Christmases, if they were properly
minded, would don for the gratification of Englishmen and Englishwomen; crowned
with holly, from amidst the polished leaves whereof shone scarlet berries;
arrayed in frosted snow, which glittered and glistened in the light of the
winter's sun; with icicles for his jewels; with white and glorious robes of
state, Christmas, surrounded by his minstrels and singers, by his bards and
story-tellers, by fair girls and happy children, by grey-beards, and stalwart
men, and smiling women, came sweeping through the City streets, and along
country lanes, flinging largess as he travelled. Alms to the poor, rest to the
weary, mirth to the young, contentment to the old, comfort to the
broken-hearted, hope to the desponding. "In remembrance," Christmas fed the
hungry, clothed the naked, sheltered the homeless, visited the fatherless and
widows in their affliction, and beautified with his beneficent hand care worn
and suffering faces. Free from earthly mists; with the glories of his radiant
apparel, undimmed by rain, unobscured by gloom, Christmas arrived, bringing
with it enchantment to George Geith. 
For weeks he had been working hard; early and late he had been battling with
balance-sheets, schedules, ledgers, journals, cash-books and day-books,
battling and winning. He had earned his rest. Even he acknowledged he deserved
his holiday as he locked his drawers, shut down his desk, closed his safe, and
began making his preparations for departure. 
Leisure earned, is sweeter by far than leisure given, or leisure stolen; and
the accountant, weary though he might be, felt triumphantly, that, so far as
his worldly occupation went, he had not left a thing undone which he ought to
have done; and that no memories of work neglected, of clients dissatisfied,
would disturb the holiday which he was about to enjoy.
Walking through the City streets, he seemed as though treading on air; he could
have greeted every man he met like a brother; he entertained no contempt for
the groups who were holding endless arguments as to what it would be best for
them to buy for the morrow's dinner. There was a beauty to him in the prize
meat, in the laurels and hollies that decorated the butchers' shops, in the
decorations of the grocers' windows, in the long lines of turkeys, in the
parti-coloured ribands that were tied round the necks of sucking pigs; there
was a life in the scene he had never noticed before, a meaning in the merriment
and excitement that pervades the streets of London on a Christmas Eve which he
had never previously grasped. 
During all the years he had passed in London, his mind had been like a broken
instrument, out of tune and out of tone; and the consequence was, that no kind
of human melody had been able to extract any answer from it, save silence, or
at best a cracked and discordant response. 
But now, the strings were replaced; and almost any hand that swept the chords
was able to draw harmony out of them. Even Christmas, which had heretofore been
a feast, which he should have liked to keep as a fast, seemed to him then the
happiest day in all the year; and he could glance at the Christmas pictures,
and read the advertisements of the Christmas stories, without a sneer.
 What a beauty he found likewise in the white country roads; what refreshment
in the cold, crisp air; what quietness in the eyes of the bright shining stars;
what exquisite loveliness in the laurels laden with frosted snow, in the great
black trees whose branches were half-clothed with white! How picturesque
Wattisbridge Church looked as he passed it by, lighted up, doubtless, for the
finishing touches to be put to the decorations for the morrow; what a Christmas
look the earth wore; what a happiness it was not to have to spend that evening
and the morrow in lonely offices in town! 
George was so wrapt up in bliss, that he had not sense enough left to whisper
to himself that Beryl was the cause of the beauty, the refreshments, the
quietness, the loveliness, the picturesqueness, the happiness. Doubtless, many
philosophical men would have analyzed the enjoyment as though it had contained
poison, would have taken away thisingredient and that, would have exhausted,
evaporated everything save Beryl, and found that all else were mere
accessories, that without Beryl all was barren; many might have done this, (I
the narrator) say, but not George Geith. He was neither philosophical nor
chemical as he crossed the threshold of the Dower House, and was greeted by Beryl in the hall. 
"The horrid old woman is here," she said, with a comical grimace; "and you will
find a room-full; when we had one affliction we thought we might as well have
more, and they all look as if they were weary of their lives; and I am sure,"
she added, executing a pas seul on the door-mat, "I am weary of mine."
"Who is wearying you?" inquired George. 
"Everybody; the drawing-room is a perfect Noah's ark filled with  you know
what. Granny, and Dick, and (old Mr Elsenham), Rev. Mr Grey and his mamma (mrs
grey), Rev. Mr Green and his sister (miss green), Mr Finch and ditto (Miss
Finch), Mr Werne and his niece (mr werne's niece), Mr Hastie and his wife (mrs
hastie), Mr Brandron and his daughters (brandron daughters), Mrs Ponder and
hers (ponder daughters); and there is not a dancing soul amongst them, and we
have been conversing rationally and making ourselves agreeable to Granny."
"You surely do not mean that you have been attempting anything of the kind?" said George.
 "I do; I laid myself out to see whether I could not annoy Granny more by
making myself pleasant than by making myself disagreeable, and I have succeeded
to perfection. I have picked up her handkerchief, and handed her fan, and given
her footstools, and got pillows for her back, and attended to her general
comfort till I knew she was ready to swear. And can't she swear; oh! Mr Geith,
you should hear her to her maid (Gibbs); I would not be that maid for ten
thousand pounds, for I should kill Granny, I know I should; I have seen her box
her ears for sticking a comb in wrongly. But now I must go to the horrors; you
remember your old room, do you not? I am so glad you have come." And with that
Beryl vanished, leaving George Geith standing in a perfect flood of sunshine,
steeped to the ears in happiness. 
Beryl had included Mr Werne amongst the bores! Poor Mr Werne! rich George
Geith! to have such amazing confidences poured into his ears; to hear Beryl was
glad to see him; to have such a home as this to come to; George verily believed
he had entered Paradise, and he lingered a minute or two longer than he had
need to have done over his dressing, just to make sure that he was not
dreaming, that this happy Christmas eve was not all an illusion. 
He had seen most of the people mentioned by Beryl on the occasion of previous
visits, so that when he at last descended the stairs and entered the
drawing-room he did not feel like a man flung head foremost into a den of
lions. He knew most of the gentlemen to speak to, and some of the ladies as
well; and though Mrs Elsenham evidently regarded his presence as an intrusion,
she was the only person in the apartment who did not, after his or her best
fashion, try to make the stranger welcome. 
As for old Mr Elsenham, who sat in a great easy-chair by the fire, he was
rapturous if not maundering in his greeting. "How is my good friend?" he
inquired, getting upon his lean legs as he spoke, and mumbling out the words as
well as want of teeth would permit him; "How did you leave the City? he! he!
Grand sight in the City on Christmas eve. Haven't seen the shops dressed this
ten years. Sit down, sit down." And with shaking hands he forced the accountant
into a chair beside him, and began rambling and chattering about the days,
"when he was young and very different; when he liked the frost and the snow and
the keen north wind; but I prefer the fire now, you see," he added, with a weak
laugh; "I cannot get too near the heat; I'm old  I'm getting old."
"I intend you to dance Sir Roger de Coverley to-night, at any rate," said
Beryl, leaning over the back of his chair. "I will have you for my partner; so
remember, sir, you are engaged, and do not desert me for anyone else, or I
shall be very angry indeed."
"It is you that desert me, Miss Flirt," he protested. "You know you promised to
marry me ten years ago, and you have never done so yet."
"But I will," answered Beryl, "if I can satisfy myself that it is lawful to
marry one's grandfather (grandfather elsenham)'s brother. I shall expect such
settlements though, and lots of pin-money!"
"What a mercenary child it is, only listen to her!" tittered the octogenarian. 
"I am only telling you what I shall expect, so that there may be no
misapprehension afterwards," observed Beryl; and at this statement (old Mr
Elsenham) laughed till he shed imbecile tears; which laughter so moved Mrs
Elsenham's indignation, that she called Beryl over to her, and remarked: "If
you do not behave yourself with greater decorum, I shall speak to your papa (mr molozane)."
"Gracious, grandma! you do not mean it, surely?" said that incorrigible young
lady. "What should you say to him?"
"I should tell him you were flirting to a disgraceful extent with that Mr Geith."
"It is of no use, grandma," said Beryl, solemnly. "Papa (mr molozane) would not
believe it. He knows I never flirt."
"Your manners are forward and unfeminine!" 
"Some people like them," retorted her granddaughter (Beryl). 
"I shall certainly mention the matter to your papa," exclaimed Mrs Elsenham. 
"I will go and tell him you want him," said Beryl, meekly; and almost
immediately afterwards she reappeared with Mr Molozane, who asked his
mother-in-law what he could do for her. 
"I want you to put a stop to the disgraceful flirtation Beryl is carrying on
with that man," said Mrs Elsenham, from the corner of a sofa which she occupied in solitary state. 
"On my word, papa," broke in Beryl, "I have not been flirting with anybody, nor
speaking a sentence to a soul except to (old Mr Elsenham). He wanted me to
marry him, and I said I would do so at once if I could only make sure he was
not within the prohibited degrees."
"Considering Mr Werne is here," resumed Mrs Elsenham, "it seems to me imprudent
in the extreme. I do not know what you may think, Ambrose, but I feel sure
Beryl will, to use a common expression, spoil her market."
"Do you really believe, then, Mr Werne is going to bid for me?" asked Beryl. 
"I really believe, miss, that if you could behave yourself with ordinary
propriety, he would propose at once."
"And then I should have a larger house than you, grandma; and only think,
perhaps six horses to my carriage!" exclaimed Beryl, rapturously. With which
conciliating speech the young lady retired from the discussion, and repaired to
the piano, where her sister (matilda) was singing her sweetest and saddest. 
"You are a perfect swan," whispered Beryl; "do, like a good, dear Tilly, play
something lively, and see if we cannot get these stupid owls to dance. I am
sick and tired of trying to talk to them, we have exhausted every subject of
conversation I can think of; try a waltz, gallop, anything;" and thus exhorted,
Miss Molozane's white fingers began rattling out "Labitzky's Aurora Walzer."
"I never hear that," said Beryl to Mr Werne, beside whom she chanced at the
moment to find herself, "without thinking of the commencement of a story I once
read; it began: 'Strauss was playing one of his most brilliant waltzes; ' what
happened after that I forget, whether everybody was happy or miserable I have
not an idea, I only know Strauss was playing, and that there was a grand
Italian ball-room, and terraces bordered with flowers, and statues and
draperies, and all sorts of pretty things."
"You are very fond of dancing and gaiety," he said, inquiringly. 
"To be sure I am; if I was a grand lady I think I should be at a party every night of my life."
"I cannot think you would care to lead such a butterfly existence."
"Indeed, I should; I can fancy nothing pleasanter than to live in the sunshine
and to die in the shade," and Beryl was off again entreating this person and
that to say she or he liked dancing, if merely a quadrille. 
"For, I declare," added the young lady, "I must dance to night, if only a
minuet, with (old Mr Elsenham)."
"It would be very shabby if we were to leave you in the lurch like that, Miss
Beryl," said Mr Finch; "I can only say I'll do my best to prevent you having to perform alone."
"Really, Mr Finch, you are a treasure," said Beryl gratefully. 
"And what am I?" asked Dick Elsenham. "I'll dance with half a dozen of them, if you like."
Thus Beryl got the party at last into motion, and I think, as a whole, when the
evening was over, no one had any cause to regret that her exertions had been crowned with success. 
"Dance!" observed Mr Richard Elsenham to Mr Werne, "if you believe me, she'd
dance till her eyebrows dropped off. Supposing she could have her own way, wouldn't she go a pace?"
Upon which comforting assurance Mr Werne slept that night uneasily. 
"I believe I have dragged that wheel," thought Dick, complacently; and he was
so well satisfied with the effect he had produced, that he danced with all the
ugly partners Beryl implored him to select, and endeavoured to induce his
grandmother to trip a measure with her brother-in-law. 
Which suggestion proving too much for Beryl's sense of the ridiculous, she had
to leave the room, just as (old Mr Elsenham) got upon his poor old legs and
gallantly offered to lead the lady to her place, an offer she indignantly declined. 
"My dancing days are over," she said, drawing a lace shawl around her ample
shoulders, "and if you want my opinion, I should say yours are over too."
"Never mind, uncle, I will be your partner," cried Louisa in a high treble,
"and I, and I, and I," exclaimed half a dozen girls, whom George Geith liked
for their hearty frankness. 
"No, indeed, Miss Loo," broke in Beryl at this juncture, re-entering the room;
"uncle belongs to me; do you not, uncle? and he shall dance with nobody else."
"Unhappy man," remarked Louisa; but the observation was lost on her sister
(beryl), who had (old Mr Elsenham) already in his place, and who looked as
pleased as though she had just carried off a prize. 
"Why haven't you got a mistletoe, Beryl," asked her partner in a pause in the
dance; and the question wherewith he went maundering off to bed, led thither by
his servant (walton), was, "why haven't you got a mistletoe, Beryl? You could
have got a good branch for half-a-crown at the greengrocer's in the next street."
"Poor uncle!" said Beryl, "he thinks he is living his old City life over again.
Only imagine, Mr Geith, what countless years must have passed since he was
young. I hope  I hope  I pray," she added, almost passionately, "I shall never
live to be like that, to be taken off to bed by a servant, and to be old, and
foolish, and feeble, and doting. How much thinner he is; his legs are just like
knitting needles; are not they?"
What, in the name of all that's wonderful, was any wise individual to say to
such a girl? Passion and ridicule, pity and amusement, in the same breath! Each
time he saw her, George Geith thought Beryl Molozane a greater puzzle; whether
she was strong or weak, wise or frivolous, perfectly straightforward or a
little false, the accountant could not decide. He only knew one thing for
certain, viz., that whatever she might be, he loved her; and that for weal or
for woe, in joy or in sorrow, he should still go on loving the girl for ever. 

CHAPTER 29. DOMESTIC PERPLEXITIES. 

Our pleasures travel by express; our pains by parliamentary. Through the
loveliest scenes the joy train of our lives rushes swiftly; at the pretty
wayside stations we are able but to touch hands with cherished friends, and
behold! we are off again; but if we have grief for our engine-driver, care for
the stoker, how we creep along the lines, how we tarry in the rain; what
leisure we have for surveying swampy ground, turnip fields soaking with wet;
stations filled with steam and smoke, and snorting, puffing engines; what a
length the weary journey seems; what an unendurable companion the trouble we
are compelled to travel with proves.
Was there ever a long, happy day, (I the narrator) wonder, even though it fell
at midsummer? Did not the sun hurry on his way, and set at noon, just as the
tide of our happiness was rising highest? Are not twelve hours of bliss
distilled into minutes? and when the moment of parting comes, does it not seem
as though we had but that instant clasped hands in joyous greeting. 
With George Geith this was the case, at any rate. Christmas eve and Christmas
day were gone almost before they came, and as he drove over to St Margaret's in
the grey light of a winter's morning, he cursed Time's rapid flight, and wished
that at the Dower House he could pluck all the feathers from its wings; still,
though the happiness was gone, he could look back on it with unutterable satisfaction. 
He had been on the enchanted island, and when tossing in the midst of the ocean
he could recall its beauties. Though away from the sunshine, he could remember
its brightness; and, amidst all the din and turmoil of his business life, he
could still find leisure to think of the Dower House, and the happy quiet hours
he had spent there. 
Sometimes whilst waiting in another man's office, sometimes in the loneliness
of his own; now whilst walking through the crowded streets, and again when
sitting silent in omnibus or train, George Geith's thoughts hurried eagerly
back to the little green spot in the way he had travelled, and rested there.
That the memory of it kept him awake at night I cannot say; but I do know he
thought of the Dower House last thing before he closed his eyes, and sometimes
in his rare dreams revisited it. 
And in sleep fancy played some strange tricks with the accountant. Once he
dreamt he was living at the Park, and Mr Molozane was offering Beryl to him;
and again, he was poor, and Beryl was telling him not to mind, for she had
plenty, and she loved him. He was a clergyman once more, and had come all the
way from Morelands to Wattisbridge to marry Cissy Hayles to his cousin Sir
Mark; but when the bride arrived she proved to be Beryl Molozane, who left Sir
Mark, and declared she would have no one but George. 
In his dreams he was an actor in scenes which he could never have imagined when
awake; and by degrees those scenes grew real to him; and George Geith, sober
man of business though he was, came to believe that these visions might someday prove realities. 
For clearly Beryl did not care for Mr Werne: and though it by no means followed
that because she did not care for him, she did care for George Geith, still
hope whispered flatteringly in the accountant's ear, that the girl might grow
to love him as he loved her. 
Day by day he mentally re-visited the Dower House, thought over the hours he
had spent there, and recalled his Christmas visit, the pleasantest and happiest
of all; the walk to Wattisbridge with Mr Molozane and Beryl, the sermon
listened to from the family pew; the old church wreathed and decorated with
holly and evergreens; the gathering of friends and acquaintances in the porch;
the comical expression on Beryl's face, as her grandmother's carriage drove off
with a bang and a crash and a rattle; her little aside of "What would I take
and be Tilly, to have to be boxed up in that hearse with Granny;" the kindness,
not to say affection, of Mr Molozane's manner  a kindness far exceeding
anything he had ever evinced towards Mr Richard Elsenham; the long, pleasant
evening, which was all the more pleasant because, for some inscrutable reason,
Mrs Elsenham elected to spend it in her dressing-room, possibly because, as
Beryl more than hinted, she had found the Christmas wine very strong; the
gaiety, the laughter, the fun, the abandon, the life and cheerfulness of that
family party; all these things stayed with George Geith, and rendered his
existence a different one to what it was when my readers first made his acquaintance. 
The Dower House was not closed to him. When he had finished his business there,
he was not bowed to the doors, and sent out into the world a stranger. Rather
the doors opened wider, and as a friend he could enter them more frequently
than as an accountant he might ever have done. 
He had told Mr Molozane how isolated he was; how, without wife, mother, sister,
or friend, he lived in the midst of the great City, and battled for his daily
bread; and the result was an invitation to visit the Dower House whenever he
could conveniently manage to do so. 
"Whilst the Dower House is mine, I shall always be glad to see you," finished
Mr Molozane; and (I the narrator) suppose it is scarcely necessary for me to
add that George Geith said he should always be glad to visit the speaker. 
Meantime, it may be asked whether Mr Molozane suspected that George cared for
his second daughter. If he did, there. can be no question about his desire that
Beryl likewise should care for George, or he never would have thrown them
together as he did. Like many another father, it is just possible that he
looked upon Beryl's marriage as remote; that in consequence of looking afar
off, he could not see what was just under his eyes; but it is more probable
that vaguely and dimly he desired to have a strong, sensible, self-reliant man
for his son-in-law; a man after his own heart; a man whom he liked, whom he had
found out for himself, who would make his favourite child a good husband. 
With regard to Mr Werne, there could be no doubt but that Mr Molozane saw he
desired to marry Beryl; and there was equally no doubt but that whilst the
father remained neutral, it was not a connection he desired. Before marriage,
men are not so adaptable as women; they see something in the individual who
comes a-wooing besides his face and his fortune; and, strange though it may
sound, the personal likings and dislikings of the males of a woman's family
towards one of their own sex, who desires to become one of them, are usually
much stronger than those of the female portion of the little community. After
marriage, male relations reconcile themselves to the inevitable with a
philosophy undreamed of by mothers and sisters; but beforehand, they have their
little predilections and are as much prejudiced against this suitor, and as
much in favour of that, as women are reputed to be. 
It was thus, at any rate, with Mr Molozane. He had his pet prejudices  his
especial fancies  and he did not like Mr Werne. He respected him certainly, but
no amount of respect will fill the smallest measure of love; not that Mr Werne
had any faults, unless being too good, too calm, could be called heinous sins;
but, simply, Mr Molozane did not like him; and though Beryl might marry the
rich man if she chose, and keep the Park in the family, and place herself high
and dry above the sea of want, still Mr Molozane would not aid in bringing about such a result. 
Undeniably, he should be glad to see Beryl well provided for, the mistress of a
large establishment, removed for ever from all chances of poverty, all
necessity for close economy; but he felt that if Beryl married a man for whom
he did not much care, she would be somehow less his daughter, and if the choice
could be given him, he would prefer that her future place of residence should
not be Molozane Park. 
He and his had lost it. Let it go. He would rather it went away from him and
from his absolutely, than that it should be recovered by his daughter. 
It was easier to a man of his temperament to lose a kingdom and depart into
exile, than thus to abdicate. If Beryl chose to marry Mr Werne, well and good.
Meanwhile he liked Mr Geith, and asked him to his house. 
As for Beryl, what with her housekeeping, the preparations for her sister
(matilda)'s marriage, and the constant worry of her grandmother (maria
elsenham)'s presence, she had enough to do during the weeks following George
Geith's visit, without troubling her little head about lovers at all. 
"The puddings alone were," as she informed her sister (matilda), "enough to
turn any person's hair grey;" and when it is considered that Mrs Elsenham was
good enough to criticise every dish which came to table, and to inquire what
had been provided for her servants (mrs elsenham's servants)' dinners, Beryl's
trouble will not be considered imaginary. 
"When Granny is not here, I could declare there are twenty different kinds of
meat; but when she is here, they are reduced to beef and mutton. 
"Mutton again!" went on Beryl, and at this point she made a loop in her chain
and looked at imaginary dishes through this imaginary eyeglass; "'mutton again;
I really wonder, Beryl, you are not ashamed to meet a sheep!' as if I could
make new beasts to kill for her, the old epicure! I wonder which I hate most,
her eyeglass or her spectacles," proceeded the young lady; "the eyeglass makes
me shudder, but the spectacles make me long to do something desperate. The way
she balances them on her fat fore-finger when she is lecturing me, drives me
crazy. I wish she would break them, I do, and then she could not read to (old
Mr Elsenham). Poor man! I am often sorry for him."
"But cannot you somehow manage more variety?" asked Miss Molozane, turning her
fine eyes on her sister, who answered: 
"If you tell me, Tilly, how to do it, I shall be greatly obliged to you. To
have to feed this garrison with our means is no light matter, without having to
serve a table every day fit for a lord. If I could have 'the fish in the lake
and the deer on the vale' from Molozane Park; if in this desert I could have
the fleshpots of Egypt, and get something to change the manna and quails diet,
it would be different; but as it is, I must make the best of it. Would not
Granny have made Moses weary of his life? would not she have entreated for the
quails, and grumbled at them afterwards? I wonder if, when I am old, I shall
care for what I eat and drink, and be greedy, and make myself disagreeable like
Granny. I would not be in your shoes, Tilly, for any money you could offer me."
"Why cannot you have fish and fruit and game and vegetables from the Park?"
asked Miss Molozane, ignoring the latter part of her sister's sentence. "You
know Mr Werne would be only too glad to send everything he has down here."
"I know he would, but papa (mr molozane) does not like it. He does not choose
to have anybody's fish, flesh, and fowl coming here without paying for it; and
he is quite right. We are not paupers yet, Miss Matilda."
"You ought to marry Mr Werne, and then these things would belong to you of
right," said the beauty (Matilda Molozane). 
"If ever I do marry Mr Werne, there is one thing you may be sure of," retorted
Beryl sharply, "that Granny shall never enter the Park gates." From which
speech it will be seen that the idea of marrying Mr Werne had entered the
child's head, and was entertained by her. 
"Bless me! "exclaimed Miss Molozane, and that young lady (beryl) proceeded with her dressing. 
"I think if ever I do marry Mr Werne," continued her sister, brushing her hair
vehemently as she spoke, "I shall marry him to spite Granny. I know nothing on
earth would annoy her so much as to think I was richer than she; and that good
man is twice as rich. What a thing it is, Tilly, to consider what lots of money
some people have!" And at this point Beryl sighed and looked over the Park, on
which the snow was lying thick. 
"I wish we had some of it," remarked Miss Molozane. "I wish (old Mr Elsenham)
would leave us his fortune when he dies."
"I wish he would give it to us now," said Beryl. "He cannot enjoy it all, and
he would miss nothing but the good books Granny reads to him; and if he likes
them, which I do not believe, I am sure any curate would give him a couple of
hours a day for fifty pounds a year. Any person like (old Mr Elsenham), who has
not a house, who gives no employment, who spends only about a tenth of his
income, and lets the remainder accumulate, ought to be compelled to provide for
young people like ourselves, who really could enjoy money."
"I suppose grandmamma will have it all," remarked Miss Molozane. 
"Or Dick," answered her sister. "For your sake, I hope, Dick; for I must say I
wish he had some fortune of his own. I should not like to be dependent on
Granny for every morsel of bread I eat; and Granny will live until the
millennium. Mark my words, Tilly, and see if she does not!"
But at this point Miss Molozane thought it best to change the conversation.
Beryl had such a disagreeable knack of turning the worst side of her intended
marriage out, of showing the excessive dearness of her bargain, that the beauty
(Matilda Molozane) declined entering upon the subject whenever it was possible
for her to avoid it; wherefore, on the present occasion, instead of replying to
Beryl's remark, she commenced wondering when "papa (mr molozane) would be back."
"Certainly to-morrow, I should say," promptly replied her sister, "or he never
would have told Robert to take over the horses to Hatfield. What a long ride he
will have of it, to be sure! Had I been in his place, I should rather have gone
into town, and come back by train to St Margaret's."
"He cannot endure London," was all the remark Miss Molozane made. 
"I wish Jane was better," groaned Beryl, reverting to housekeeping troubles.
"It is so awkward having, as I may say, only one servant, and Robert away, and
that fine lady (gibbs) and gentleman (walton) of Granny's to be waited on and
cooked for; if it were not for Louey I don't know how I should manage at all."
"Can you not get help from the village?"
"By paying, Tilly, by paying; and I have to consider every sixpence. I cannot
worry papa (mr molozane) for money, I cannot, can. not, cannot do it;" and
Beryl's cheeks grew red as she said this. 
"I had a few sovereigns of my own," she resumed, "and they are gone, and Louey
broke open her box and gave me all she had, thirty-five shillings, and that is
gone, all gone, to give that old woman (maria elsenham), who might just as well
be at Wattisbridge Inn, dainties and tit-bits! It is no wonder I hate her."
"Oh! Beryl, I am so sorry," broke out the beauty (Matilda Molozane). "If you
had only asked me yesterday I could have given you ten pounds, but I have spent
it; I had no idea you and Louey were using your own money, or I would have given it to you."
"I would not have had it," returned Beryl, snappishly, "for you get it from
Granny, and I will not have her money; only, remember this, Tilly, that if you
are going to be married at all, the sooner you are married and out of this the
better I shall be pleased."
With which gracious speech, Miss Beryl, whose temper had been that day tried
beyond its power of endurance, flounced out of the room to see if domestic
matters were progressing to her satisfaction. 
It was a wretched afternoon; the snow was lying thick on the roads, and the sky
was dull and leaden and heavy; no walking could be had, though Beryl felt if
she could but get out for an hour she might calm down her irritation, and be
fitter for the task of entertaining her grandmother (maria elsenham) and (old
Mr Elsenham) through the interminable evening. Dick was dressing to go out for
dinner, and Beryl wished she was going too  "Or rather I wish," she corrected
herself, "they were all going, and I to stay at home;" in default of which
desire being gratified, she commenced roaming about the house seeking rest and finding none. 
Because, wherever she went she encountered her grandmother (maria elsenham), or
something connected with her grandmother; met either that lady marching about
holding herself like a soldier on parade, or the lady's-maid (gibbs) in the
passages, or Mr Elsenham's man (walton) on the staircase. 
Finally, although the library was littered with various inferior articles
belonging to the trousseau on which the Withefell dressmaker was spending her
best skill, Beryl took up her position there, and sat looking out at the
terrace, where they had all passed so many merry hours during the previous
summer, till the afternoon darkened into twilight, and twilight deepened into night. 
With candles came Mrs Elsenham to inspect the needlewoman's progress through
her eyeglass, and from her distant chair Beryl, whose vision was perfect,
watched the proceedings, saw Mrs Elsenham's stately airs of patronage, her
wooden-smile of approbation, and heard the dressmaker's ma'am, ma'am, ma'am,
repeated till she could have anathematized the creature for her obsequiousness. 
The town lady's one great aim was to impress the provincial sempstress with the
honour she was conferring upon her by suffering the future Mrs Elsenham's
apparel to be made by any but a person living at the West-End. One might have
thought, to hear her, that a handkerchief could not be properly hemmed except
within a given distance of the parks; and that it was impossible for stitching
to be passable a mile from Piccadilly. Nevertheless, Mrs Elsenham was pleased
finally to observe the work was very creditable, and the marking "beautiful."
"I must really show it to Gibbs," said Mrs Elsenham, referring to her maid, and
actually ignoring the fact that her maid had seen the work and reported upon
its quality to her mistress. With this gracious speech, Beryl's grandmother
left the apartment, leaving a general effect of trailing black satin and
sweeping black velvet behind her. 
"What nonsense it all is," remarked Beryl, coming to the table and tossing over
the laces and cambrics with no tender hand. "The only good I can see in it,
Miss Sparks, is that it has kept your fingers out of mischief, and will put
money in your pocket. As for me, if ever I marry  if ever  I'll walk to church
in a cotton morning gown and straw bonnet."
"Law, Miss Beryl, how you do talk, to be sure; what would any gentleman say to
a lady dressed like that?"
"I am quite unable to tell you what he would say," answered Beryl, laughing: "I
can only tell you what I would do. Supposing, now, I was engaged to-day, I
should like to be married to-morrow; and have none of this fuss, and trouble,
and worry, and expense."
"Well, it is an expense, miss, to be sure," agreed the complaisant Miss Sparks;
"but then, it is a thing that mostly comes only once in a lifetime."
"It does not come once to some people," Beryl was just about to remark, when
she luckily remembered that Miss Sparks had arrived at an age when her chance
of changing her name was small; for which reason the young lady altered her
sentence into  "Once is often enough; and if it involves all this trouble, it
is, in my opinion, once too often."
"If it was your own, Miss Beryl, you would think differently."
"Perhaps I might," was the reply; "but, at any rate, that is what I think now;"
and with this speech, Beryl wandered out of the room, to plunge into domestic
troubles again, and to help as best she might to preserve order almost in the midst of chaos. 
"The next time, Jane, that you upset a kettle of scalding water over yourself
when Granny is here," she remarked to the cook who was laid up in consequence
of having performed that feat, "I really shall be cross. As if you could not
have chosen some better opportunity;" and thus scolding, Beryl nursed the woman
and saw to her wants. 
"I don't like to see you messing about, miss," pleaded the sufferer (Jane). "If
I do need anything, Ann could come to me now and then."
"Ann has trouble enough of her own about the dinner, without attending to you,"
said Beryl, as she poured the poor soul out a cup of tea. "And now, don't fret,
but make haste and get well, Jane; that is the wisest thing you can do."
After which philosophical remark, the young lady settled her patient (jane)
down for sleep, first assuring her that she had made the pastry herself; "so I
know it will be good, and Granny will eat till she makes herself ill; and then
she will take boxes of blue pills to make herself worse."
So far as the eating was. concerned, Beryl proved a true prophet; for Mrs
Elsenham did full justice to the tarts. 
"If I were you," she said to Beryl, "I should turn Ann into cook, and get rid
of Jane altogether. Ann can send up a far better dinner than Jane. That crust
was delicious," and Mrs Elsenham was graciously pleased, on the strength of
this assertion, to take another glass of port, a wine she particularly affected. 
Whether it was the port, or the pastry, or the entrees, Beryl did not know; but
never before had her grandmother been so gracious to her as on this especial
evening. She even asked Beryl to sing; and was so kind as to remark  waking up
from a nap, be it observed  "that, although her voice had no power, or variety,
or flexibility, it was still sweet, a soothing voice," finished Mrs Elsenham;
whereupon her brother-in-law (old mr elsenham), jumping up from a distant sofa,
added, "Yes, that is precisely it, Maria; you have hit it exactly; Beryl's
singing always sends me to sleep."
"So that I am of some use in the world, if only as a sedative," replied Beryl;
adding, in a lower voice, to her sister, "just as Granny is an irritant."
"Sing something else," said the commander-in-chief. 
"Yes, do Beryl. Sing, 'I remember,'" echoed (old Mr Elsenham); and, in his
cracked old voice, he hummed with her: 
"I remember, I remember, how my childhood fleeted by; 
All the snows of the December, all the warmth of the July."
Till he had to break off, coughing violently, which brought down a scolding
from Mrs Elsenham, who assured him he ought to know better than attempt to sing anything. 
"It is all very well for young people," added his ample relative; "but it does
not do for persons of our age to try to pass for nightingales."
"Goodness, grandmamma, did you ever try to pass for one?" asked Beryl, facing
round on the music stool to put the question. 
"Don't be pert, miss," was all the satisfaction she got from Mrs Elsenham;
whilst the idea so tickled (old Mr Elsenham), that he laughed till he coughed
again, for which result Beryl, as it was her fault, came in for a lecture. 
Nevertheless the evening passed off on the whole tranquilly; and the whole
party sat up so late, that when Mr Richard Elsenham returned home  as usual,
not too sober  he found the whole farm-yard, as he phrased it, still astir. 
"Don't move," he said, forcing Beryl back into her place. "Shing for  me 
nothing out of your con  foun  ded operas, but shomething jolly. We'll shing
'Buffalo gals' together. Matilda, you keep away; we don't want you; do we, Beryl?"
"Richard, I am ashamed of you," said Mrs Elsenham, severely. 
"Why," he asked, steadying himself against the piano.
 "To see you come home in such a disgraceful condition! Go to bed at once!"
"That is what you do, old lady (maria elsenham), I suppose," he retorted; and
to cut short the controversy, which would soon have become a quarrel, Beryl was
forced to interpose, and escort her cousin to the door, where he turned, and
with drunken gravity assured all whom it might concern, that "Beryl was a
trump, that he loved her, and that his grandmother was a tough old hen."
After this, Mrs Elsenham thought it time to separate for the night. 
"I second that proposal," said Beryl, with a yawn. 
"So do I, if it is of any use," added Louisa. 
"Bless my heart. I thought I was in bed," exclaimed (old Mr Elsenham), rubbing
his eyes. "I am very glad to be awake, though," he went on. "I dreamt I was a
clerk again at Martin's, and could not get my columns to agree, and he was
raging about the office just as he used to do. Thank you, my dear," and the old
man, putting one hand on Beryl's shoulder, shambled up the staircase, rambling
on about Martin's and his balance, and how glad he was to wake, till his
servant took him in charge, and left Beryl free to go to her own room. 
"What in the world is the matter?" asked Louisa, as her sister broke out crying
crying almost hysterically. 
"I am tired, Loo; and I am worried; and hearing that old man (old mr elsenham)
talking about his young days, and thanking God that he had waked to find
himself the feeble, purposeless, decrepit creature he is, poured the last drop
in my cup. I know I am expressing myself badly, Loo, but you will understand what I mean."
Which Miss Loo proved she did, by at once, after the fashion of young authors,
sitting down, and putting the whole affair into poetry.
"Do not ask me to listen to it," said Beryl, sleepily. "Your notions could not
be like mine, and, at any rate, I have cried as much as I want to cry; so
good-night, and do make haste into bed, and put out the candle," injunctions
Louisa obeyed after she had re-read her poem lovingly, and erased here, and added there. 
"You really have torn yourself away from it at last," remarked Beryl, looking
at her sister (louisa) with half-closed eyes, and then she went fairly off into
a sound sleep, from which, about three o'clock the next morning, she was awaked
by a violent shake, and an awful apparition in an elaborate night-dress and
flannel dressing-gown (maria elsenham), saying to her, in a voice thick with
fat and excitement, "Get up, Beryl! get up at once!"

CHAPTER 30. DEATH. 

"I would as soon have seen a ghost," said Beryl, when telling the story
afterwards, and it may be doubted whether a ghost would have frightened the girl as much. 
Never before had she beheld her grandmother (maria elsenham) in her undress
uniform, and what with being awakened in the middle of the night in such a
bustle, what with the glare of the candle, and the horror of what such a visit
might betoken, Beryl was awake in a moment, and standing out in the middle of
the room, asking what was amiss, whether anything had happened to her father. 
"No; it was (old Mr Elsenham)," was the reply; and the words seemed to Beryl's
fancy to wander off through the deep forest of her grandmother's cap frills.
"He has had a fit of some kind, and a doctor must be sent for immediately."
"I suppose Walton can go," said Beryl, who had by this time ceased rubbing her
eyes, and was dresssing herself with all speed. 
"Impossible; he cannot leave his master."
"Then Dick must," remarked Beryl. 
"Cannot you send Ann?"
"Cannot you send Gibbs?" retorted Beryl; and the young girl and the old woman
(maria elsenham) looked at each other. 
"Ann is not able to walk to Wattisbridge," went on Beryl, "and if she were, she would be afraid."
"And it would be useless for me even to name such a thing to Gibbs."
"Dick can ride my pony (Trot the pony)," Beryl thought out loud; "I suppose he
can manage without a saddle and "
"Go and wake him at once," interrupted Mrs Elsenham, "and tell him to start directly."
It was not an agreeable commission, but still Beryl started off to perform it.
After hammering at the door in vain for a minute or two, she lost patience, and
turning the handle, went in. 
"Dick! Dick!" she cried. "Good gracious, how he snores! Dick, do wake. (One
might as well speak to a post.) Dick!" and at this point Beryl laid down her
candlestick, and with both hands shook her cousin; an attention which he repaid
by flinging both arms out of bed and striking her across the face with one of them. 
"You are like a vicious horse," said Beryl, "that kicks if it is touched. Can
you not waken enough to know who I am? I am Beryl, Dick."
"And what the devil do you want with me?" was the courteous reply. 
"I want you to get up; (old Mr Elsenham) is very ill, and we have nobody to
send for a doctor, and you can ride my pony (Trot the pony)."
Whereupon Miss Molozane's fianc cursed himself if he would do anything of the kind. 
"But he has had a fit," remonstrated Beryl, "and it may kill him."
"Give him another chance for his life, then, by keeping the doctor away,"
growled Dick, and he deliberately settled himself among the pillows for another sleep. 
"You don't mean to say you will not get up?" cried Beryl aghast: "I am
perfectly serious, Dick, we have not a soul about the place who can go but
yourself, and (old Mr Elsenham) is in great danger."
To which the unselfish young man replied that he did not care a d-- if the
doctor never came, that he would ride over in the morning, if she liked, but
that he would not stir a foot then, no, not for the Queen, if she asked him. 
"If it was worth my while I would make you get up, you great lazy, useless
sot," gasped Beryl, in a rage, and she went out of the room banging the door
after her, and ran to (old Mr Elsenham)'s apartment to see what was really the matter. 
"The doctor?" said Walton to her inquiringly. 
"Has Dick gone?" asked Mrs Elsenham. 
"Not yet," answered Beryl. 
"Good God!" exclaimed her grandmother, "he will be dead before we can get any
help; tell him not to delay, and to ride fast."
"I want you, Tilly," was all Beryl said in answer to this, and seizing her
sister by the arm, she hurried her away downstairs, across the kitchen, along
stone passages, and so finally out into the yard, talking to her as she went. 
"Then who is to go, if Dick won't?" asked Miss Molozane. 
"I will," answered Beryl; "I am not afraid of going, (Trot the pony) will not
be long cantering over, and I can come back with Dr Mawley."
"You, Beryl?" said the beauty (Matilda Molozane). 
"Yes, I, Beryl, unless you will go in my place." 
"What would papa (mr molozane) say?"
"That no child of his should marry a man who lies in bed (dick elsenham) and
lets women do men's work," returned Beryl fiercely; "at least, I know if I were
Mr Molozane, that is what I should say."
"But, Beryl"
"Shall we let (old Mr Elsenham) die, and not stretch out a finger to save him?"
interrupted Beryl; "if that is what you would like I cannot do it, so hold me
the lantern, Tilly, and make yourself of more use than your future husband (dick elsenham)."
Very mutely Miss Molozane obeyed this imperious command. If she disliked
picking her steps across the wet yard she was afraid to say so; if she felt it
horribly lonely to remain with (Trot the pony) whilst Beryl ran back for her
bonnet and shawl, she yet never ventured to leave her post; if it went against
the grain to see Beryl doing ostler's work, slipping on Trot's bridle and
tightening his girths, she did not venture to remonstrate, for Beryl never let
her forget whose fault it was that forced her into the stable and out into the night. 
"I would not marry Dick," said Beryl, pulling the straps till (Trot the pony)
groaned audibly, "I would not marry Dick, if he were as rich as Rothschild, and
a duke into the bargain, I would rather marry (old Mr Elsenham); and if I was
you," went on the excited young lady, taking up the stirrup-leather a hole as
she spoke, "I would break off the match now, even if you had to end your days
in the workhouse. I never felt so tempted in all my life as I did to pour a jug
of water over him; I wish you would go back and do it for me, Tilly."
"I will ask grandmamma to insist on his getting up, if you like," said Miss Molozane, meekly.
"You can do about that as you choose," answered Beryl; "he will perhaps be
dressed by the time I come back."
"I wish you would not go," pleaded the elder sister (matilda), "I am so wretched."
"And so am I  about your marrying Dick," retorted Beryl. "Come, Trot. Good-bye,
Tilly," and the young lady was in the saddle and off before Miss Molozane could
offer another word of remonstrance. 
Meantime, in the house all was confusion; no one knew what to do, or what to
get, or how to be silent. The sick-room was a perfect Babel, while Mrs Elsenham
was in such a state of despair as to suggest grave doubts whether (old Mr
Elsenham) had made a will. 
"If he should go off!" she cried, marching about the room in dishabille,
perfectly regardless of the presence of Walton. "If we only knew what to do.
Beryl, have you no books about medicine in the house? Is there no one we could
send for Mr Werne? Where is Beryl? What is she doing, away at such a time?
Matilda, tell her to come here at once."
"Beryl has gone to Wattisbridge for Dr Mawley," said Miss Molozane, drawing her
grandmother aside; "Dick would not get up, so she went herself."
"Beryl  went  herself," repeated Mrs Elsenham.
"Yes, but we need not let the servants know it," answered Miss Molozane,
careful even at that moment of appearances; "and do not call Dick, grandmamma,"
she entreated, as Mrs Elsenham hurried out of the room. "We had better not let
Dr Mawley know he was in the house; it looks so bad; it really is a disgrace to us all."
"I do not care half so much about the look as I do about the fact," said Mrs
Elsenham, pausing, however, as she spoke; "the idea of his refusing to get up 
the notion of Beryl starting off by herself. I declare," went on the old lady,
doing justice for the first time to the grandchild she disliked  "I declare, in
any trouble Beryl is worth twenty ordinary people; she has all her wits about
her in a moment. She ought to have been a man," finished Mrs Elsenham,
regretfully; "I wish Beryl had been the boy instead of Dick."
Which wish suggested such a series of complicated relationships to Miss
Molozane, that she felt herself incapable of making any comment on it, and the
pair wandered back into the sick-room to watch, and wait, and long for the
doctor (dr mawley), who came within the hour. 
"She is staying with Mrs Mawley," he explained to Miss Molozane, speaking about
her sister (beryl); "I did not wait for my own gig to be got ready, but rode
back on Miss Beryl's pony (Trot the pony). No; there is no hope," he went on,
in answer to a question concerning (old Mr Elsenham). "He may linger a day or
two, though I do not expect it, but the result will be the same. When persons
get to his time of life, it is wick, not oil, that is wanting in the lamp  not oil."
"Will he ever be sensible again?" asked Mrs Elsenham, who was crying quite
naturally and unaffectedly at the doctor (dr mawley)'s statement. 
"I fear not," was the reply;" but in case he have left any of his affairs
unsettled it might be well to send for his lawyer, or indeed for any lawyer, if
there be no change before morning. He might be in possession of his faculties
for a short time before death, but I greatly question it  greatly question it."
This was a habit of Dr Mawley's, to repeat some two or three words at the end
of every sentence; but in the present case his repetition only confirmed Mrs
Elsenham's fears, and she wept copiously. 
"I wish Beryl was back," she said; "she would be of such use. When will she be here, doctor?"
"Shortly, I think," was the reply. "My man (dr mawley's servant) was to drive
her over; and I told him to lose no time in case of any medicine being
required, so we may expect her almost immediately."
About half an hour afterwards Beryl made her appearance, but when she arrived
there was nothing more for anyone to do, save sit down patiently and wait for
the end, which came just as the sun was rising. 
"I think," Beryl had said to her grandmother (maria elsenham), "I can lay his
head more comfortably," and she was lifting it for the purpose when the jaw
fell, the eyes turned, and the last breath passed the old man (old mr elsenham)'s lips. 
"Oh, (Doctor Mawley)! oh, doctor!" cried the girl (beryl), but before the
doctor (dr mawley) could reach her she fell on the floor in a swoon. 
"Caused by fright and exhaustion," said the man of medicine, coolly; and he
carried her off to bed. 
CHAPTER 31. EAVESDROPPING 

When Mr Richard Elsenham heard of his relation (old mr elsenham)'s death, he
made an observation to the effect, that, considering the length of time it had
taken him to live, he had been in a remarkable hurry to die. 
As a matter of course, the young man (dick elsenham) expressed himself
strongly, using various forms of oath on the occasion, and indulging in a
greater number of expletives than ordinary, but the above contains the sense of
what he said, and it was all that could be got out of him by any one. 
Words wasted were Mrs Elsenham's remarks on her grandson (dick elsenham)'s
laziness and want of manliness. His comment on Beryl's ride for the doctor (dr
mawley) was "more fool she," and his whole behaviour became so perfectly
independent, bearish, and unendurable, that long before the funeral everybody
in the Dower House conjectured (old Mr Elsenham) had left no will, and that
consequently Dick was a rich man. 
"It is an ill wind that blows nobody good," said the sensitive heir (dick
elsenham), to Dr Mawley; "I am sure I never expected such luck," and Dick,
released at last from petticoat government, began to assert his rights. 
Almost the first use he made of his new freedom was privately to propose to
Beryl, who refused him with such a storm of reproaches, that Dick mockingly put
both hands to his head, lest the tempest should blow it off. 
"As you like," he said; adding, with his customary polite ness, "but I am
damnably mistaken if you do not live to repent your decision."
"And if I had my way," continued Beryl, "Tilly should not marry you either  no,
not if we had to keep a school."
Which keeping a school, being Beryl's idea of the acme of human misery, would
have left her with the best of the discussion; but that Dick said coolly he was
not by any means certain he should marry Tilly at all. 
"Well, then, you shall!" retorted Beryl, with charming inconsistency. Whereupon
Mr Richard Elsenham broke out into a roar of laughter, and told his cousin "her
temper was delicious."
Nevertheless Dick was quite in earnest. He did want to marry Beryl, and he did
not wish to marry Tilly; and when he and his grandmother (maria elsenham)
returned to town, and left the Dower House to its customary quiet, it became a
very grave question with Beryl whether her sister (matilda)'s engagement ought
not to be broken off. 
Pride urged one course, poverty suggested another. 
"Unfortunately, Beryl," argued Mr Molozane, "this marriage is the only
desirable future I can see for Matilda. Suppose she gives him up, what then?"
"Why, then she can live at home, like the rest of us," said Beryl, hotly. 
"But will she be satisfied? Without her visits to London, without Mrs
Elsenham's horses, without Mrs Elsenham's presents, with no excitement or hope
of change, will she be content?"
"I am afraid she would be dull," sighed Beryl. 
"And further," went on Mr Molozane, "I really think Matilda is fond of Dick,
and that it would be a very serious trouble to her to have to give him up."
"To give what he can give her, up, I suppose you mean, papa (mr molozane)?"
"No, Beryl, I do not. She had the chance of having much more than he can give
her, and you remember she refused."
"I remember," groaned Beryl. 
"And as for Matilda marrying a curate or doctor, or any struggling man, the
thing is out of the question," went on Mr Molozane, speaking his thoughts
aloud. "She would be wretched with short means; no affection could reconcile
her to a small house, untidy servants, and the want of society; you know that
yourself, Beryl. Matilda must travel the matrimonial road in a carriage and
pair; and as she likes Dick, I am afraid we must let matters remain as they are."
"But if he refuse to marry, papa?" Beryl asked.
"I cannot imagine an impossibility," said Mr Molozane, coldly; and his daughter
forbore to tell him her reason for thinking Dick might decline to fulfil his engagement. 
Meantime the estate of the late (old Mr Elsenham) was discovered not to leave
so large an available income as Dick could have desired. There was plenty of
property, but it was property which did not yield a high per-centage; and
altogether, by the time his various interviews with the lawyers (old mr
elsenham's lawyers) came to an end, Mr Richard Elsenham discovered, fortunately
or unfortunately for Matilda, as the reader likes to take it, that it would be
as well for him to keep on good terms with his grandmother (maria elsenham),
and marry the wife she had laid out for him. 
Moreover, Dick had a very wholesome dread of Mr Molozane. That gentleman, he
knew, would have entertained no scruple about horsewhipping him had he jilted
Matilda; so, after suggesting to Mrs Elsenham that a settlement on his wife
would be desirable, and carrying his point, Dick brought his mind to the
starting-point again, and professed his readiness to run in the race matrimonial.
Mr Molozane was anxious also that the marriage should no longer be delayed. 
Drifting towards the sea, he was desirous that one daughter should be in safety
before he reached it; and accordingly when the trees in Fen Court were putting
out their pale green leaves, George Geith, opening another highly glazed
envelope, discovered that Matilda Molozane was, at last, Mrs Richard Elsenham. 
He had known previously that he should not be asked to be present, for the
marriage, in consequence of (old Mr Elsenham)'s recent death, was so strictly
private that, excepting the groom's best man, there was not a single stranger invited. 
"I never saw such a dismal affair," said Beryl to Mr Geith, on the occasion of
his next visit to the Dower House. "To commence with, it was a raw, cold
morning, and we all looked blue. If you can fancy Matilda ugly, I should say
she was ugly that day. Our teeth were chattering with the cold, and everything
went wrong. The sexton had not the doors open, and we had to sit shivering in
the carriages till he was sent for and brought the keys. Then he declared Dick
told him eleven, instead of ten; and I believe Dick had, though it was all
settled and written down, so that there might be no mistake. Dick and Mr Harley
Elsenham lounged in about ten minutes afterwards, and then the (withefell
clergyman) had to be brought from his breakfast, and came rushing into the
vestry with his mouth full. 
"After that the sexton put Mr Harley Elsenham in the groom's place; and I
believe if it had not been for me he would have been married to Tilly instead
of Dick. Finally, I had such a piece of work to get off her glove  she always
will wear them so tight; and Dick could not find the ring. He had put it
amongst his silver; and had to sort through about two pounds of shillings and
sixpences before he could find it. 
"When it came to the signing, Tilly put Elsenham instead of Molozane; and the
(withefell clergyman) was in such a rage I am sure he could have sworn. Just as
if one was being married every day, and knew what to do by heart!
"We were very glad to get back to the fire, I can assure you; and I think both
Tilly and Dick would rather have staid beside it than gone off."
"After the fuss and to-do beforehand," chimed in Louisa, "it seemed such a
come-down to blue noses and three carriages. I never heard of such a shabby
affair in my life. The house was turned inside out for months, and then when it
came to the grand ceremonial everything, as Dick said, 'missed fire.' And if
you believe me, Mr Geith, Granny took all the cake off with her, and did not
leave me and Beryl even a crumb to dream on."
"She will be laid up for a week with it, at any rate, that's some comfort," remarked Beryl.
"And she will not be much here for the future, that is a greater comfort,"
added Louisa, as she betook herself to her writing, with the air of a
philosopher whose territory has been encroached upon by the vain inhabitants of a frivolous world. 
Poor Loo! in those days she was building edifices great and fair on paper, she
was raising fairy palaces, and fought in ink with the giant Poverty, till out
of her dreamland she routed the intruder, wounded and discomfited. With her pen
she vanquished all difficulties, over tempest-tossed waters she floated into
safe and pleasant harbours. To her age, to her hopefulness, to her genius,
there seemed nothing impossible; and she said, over and over again, to Beryl
that she felt certain as she was living, that if she could but be in London for
three months, she should be able to sell all her manuscripts and make
everything comfortable at home for ever after. 
Mentally she asked and received fabulous prices. Three novels a year, and as
many plays, to say nothing of short poems and trifling tales, "things," said
the young lady (louisa), "which I could write in half-an-hour; " was the work
she thought she could get through easily. 
"Surely," she observed to Beryl, "I could make a thousand a year, without any
trouble at all, and you should copy for me, and we would get Miss Sparkes to do
all our needlework. Would it not be nice, Beryl?"
"It would, only I do not think I should like copying," answered Beryl. 
"Well, perhaps I might not require to copy after a little time. Oh! how I wish
I could get to London. I do not mean to Granny's or Tilly's, but just to
London, by myself; where I could do what I liked and say what I liked, without
being snubbed at every turn."
Very far away seemed London in those days to the child (louisa). She did not
know she was travelling as fast to the great city as the course of events could
take her; she could not tell that before the summer glory had faded from the
landscape she would have her wish, and be dropped into the turmoil of the
modern Babylon, to make her way to fortune if she could. 
Never came ruin much faster to man than it rushed on Mr Molozane, and when the
June roses were once more filling the gardens of the Dower House with beauty
and perfume, Beryl came to understand that they not merely had to give up the
Park but also everything else; the dear old home, the familiar haunts, the
stately trees, the pleasant fields, and go forth into the world, shorn of
riches and station, to earn their bread. 
The news fell upon her like a thunderbolt. All her fears had never suggested
anything to her so bad as this. She had dreaded having to sell the Park having
to live with the same straitened economy always; but to be left without a home
at all, or the means to take another, to have either to work or to beg, had not
come into her calculations, and for a time she moved about the house like one walking in a dream. 
Such trouble as the two girls (beryl) (louisa) fell into about leaving the
Dower House, George Geith, who was staying there for the last time, had never
beheld. Such lingering walks over the pleasant fields, such tearful adieus to
wood and dell, and fountain; such treasuring of wild flowers and ferns, and
grass and mosses; such a clinging to the very earth, as though it were in truth
their mother; such sobbings and sadness, such long, long looks, that seemed
trying to appropriate the landscape to themselves for ever; such silence in
lieu of the old mirth, such sick faint smiles, such flagging conversation.
Never had George Geith been in a house before which the presence of sorrow pervaded so entirely. 
But that made no difference to him. In joy or in grief, the accountant liked
the Dower House better than any other spot on the face of the earth. He would
rather have been with those girls (louisa) (beryl) in their trouble, than in
any palace in Europe; and so he stayed on, day after day, stayed for the end,
which could not, he foresaw, now be far off. 
He was free of the Dower House as though it had been his own home. He could
come and go as business required, and always be certain of a hearty welcome, of
a reluctant good-bye. All matters were talked over before him as though he were
a son or a brother. The irrevocable past, the probable future, Mr Molozane now
spoke of freely to his daughters (louisa) (beryl), while George sat by
listening in silence, unless appealed to for advice or an opinion. 
Worn out in mind and body, it often happened that Mr Molozane slept in the
evening twilight; and then, quite as a matter of course, George walked on the
terrace outside the library windows, either with the girls (beryl) (louisa) or
with his cigar for company; and when he was alone one thought stole ever
uppermost in his mind  would Beryl care enough for him in the days to come to
marry him, and if so, should he ever have the means to marry her? 
If he had been rich enough, he was by this time so sure of his own heart, that
he would have decided the matter one way or other within the week; but George
felt he was not yet rich enough, and he had laid it out in his own mind that he
would never ask the girl to engage herself to him, unless he was prepared to marry her forthwith. 
He would not have her pledge her faith to an uncertainty. He would work
fettered by no chain himself. If ever God gave him wealth enough to enable him
to marry Beryl Molozane, then with all his heart and soul and strength he would
strive to win her for his wife. If not, why it was better for the girl to be
free, for her to marry someone else, never suspecting who would have worked
like a galley-slave for her sake. Least of all would he strive by any means to
win her now, when wealth lay before her  when she had but to stretch out her
hand and take back the lands of her forefathers, and be rich and prosperous, and happy. 
Yes, happy; for with such a husband as Mr Werne, with such a sunny temper as
her own, how could Beryl be otherwise than happy? more especially  and at this
point George sneered bitterly  as she was certain that no such poverty would
enter the doors of Molozane Park as might tempt her love to fly out by the window. 
And when all was said and done, why did not the girl marry Mr Werne? Was it
that he was prudent, or that she was shy? Where was the hitch? Did Mr Werne not
know how the Molozanes were situated? Had he no suspicion that the father (mr
molozane) would have to become bankrupt, and the daughters probably have to
trust to their grandmother for their support? Or had he proposed and been
refused? George could not credit it; for Mr Werne's manner was not that of a
rejected suitor; and his visits to the Dower House were of almost daily
occurrence. Would he propose? would she accept? 
These were the pleasant questions George Geith was wont to propound to himself
in the evenings when, sitting out on the terrace, he smoked in the twilight
till Mr Molozane joined him. It was getting dark on one of these occasions; he
had finished a couple of cigars, but still sat on, waiting for Mr Molozane to
waken, and for the moon to rise. 
The bench he occupied was at the extreme end of the terrace, and close beside
one of the windows of the library. 
He had nothing to do but step through that window in order to banish his
disagreeable reflections, but he preferred remaining where he was. At times
George Geith liked thinking till he grew wretched, and on the evening in
question he chanced to be in a self-tormenting mood. 
Mr Werne had been at the Dower House twice that day; beyond a doubt Mr Molozane
had communicated to him the state of his affairs; beyond a doubt likewise that
revelation would hurry his proposal, and then, then would Beryl have him? Would
Beryl go up and live at the Park, and become a great lady, courted, flattered,
spoiled? Would he lose her for ever? Would the Beryl he had known pass away
from the simplicity of her present life, away from the morning sunshine, and
the roses heavy with dew, to become the stately mistress of Molozane Park? If
she liked, she might do so, but he, George, would never wish to see her again;
he would keep the Beryl he had known shrined in his heart, and spoil the effect
of that portrait by the sight of none other. 
He had just arrived at this point, when Beryl herself came into the library.
Everything was so still around that George could hear her asking softly, "Are you asleep, papa?"
"No, Beryl;" and at the answer the accountant wondered if Mr Molozane had been
thinking his thoughts too in the darkness. 
"I have come to ask you something," went on the girl, "I want to know; papa,
whether or not you would like me to marry Mr Werne?"
She spoke the words very slowly and distinctly; so slowly, indeed, that they
seemed to fall down singly and separately into George Geith's heart, like
pebbles dropped into a well. 
"What should you like, my darling?" answered Mr Molozane. 
"It would give us back the Park, it would enable us to keep this house, we
should not have to leave Withefell at all, it would pay our debts, and make us
Molozanes once more," proceeded Beryl, without answering his question. 
"It would not give me back the Park," answered her father, with a certain
anguish in his voice; "it would not enable me to keep this house, I should have
to leave Withefell in any case, for no man shall ever pay my debts for me, and
nothing can ever make me a Molozane, with landed possessions and county influence, again."
"Do you mean, papa (mr molozane), that you would take nothing from Mr Werne,
that you would not let him help you, that even if I married him you would not
continue to live on here?"
"I could not, Beryl," he replied; "I could starve, but I could not eat the
bread of charity; I could work, but I could not live on the purchase-money of
my own child. Leave me out of your calculations, Beryl. That I should be glad
to see you placed beyond the reach of want I do not deny, but that your wealth
should ever help my poverty is impossible."
"But, papa, from me, from Beryl;" George, holding his breath and listening as
though he had been the meanest eavesdropper, knew that by this time she was on
her knees, with her arms around his neck and his hand drawn down on her
shoulder: "From me, from Beryl."
"It would not be from you, Beryl; it would be from Mr Werne."
"I think I shall marry him, and then you will look at things differently," she said. 
"Marry him if you like," replied Mr Molozane, "you have my full consent to do
so; something more than my consent, perhaps," he added, with a sigh. "Could you
be happy with him, Beryl? I know he would strive to make you happy; but could
you make yourself so, my darling?"
"I could be happy anywhere," she said, "if you were happy too;" and then there
came a long silence, during which George knew Beryl was crying, ay, and perhaps her father too. 
After that pause  "Papa," began the girl, "I have to give Mr Werne an answer,
one way or another, to-night: what shall it be?"
"What you like, Beryl; whichever way you decide, I shall be satisfied."
"Decide for me, papa; say you will live on here, that you will not leave
Withefell; and I shall then thankfully marry Mr Werne."
Thankfully! with that sob in her voice. If he could have got away from his
position without letting them know he had heard the earlier part of the
conversation, George Geith would have left his seat, for his own suspense was
becoming so in tolerable that he was afraid of losing his self-command. As it was: 
"Beryl," answered Mr Molozane, "I do not deny it would be a great relief to me
if you married Mr Werne from love, for he could give you everything I should
like to see your husband possess, except family; and family in England, without
money to back it up, is a mere empty word. Wherever I might be, whatever I
might be doing, it would comfort me to think one child had a good husband, able
to shelter her from all the storms of life; but if you do not love him, Beryl 
do you love him? can you love him, my child  God forgive me for saying it, if
it be a sin  my favourite child?"
"Papa (mr molozane), you will let him do something for you?"  she said this
faintly, with her cheek resting against his. "If I marry him, you will live on
here, where I can see you every day, and come to nurse you if you are sick; you will promise that?"
"My darling, if I stayed on here, I must starve."
"But if Mr Werne"
"Stop, Beryl, stop; should you like to see your father dependent for his daily
bread on your husband's bounty? Should you care to see me eating the crumbs
that fall from his table? Somehow it has pleased God to ordain that I shall be
as Lazarus; but I would rather go away from Dives' door, and carry my poverty with me."
"Mr Werne would be so happy, papa, to help us all."
"At present, doubtless," was the reply; "but he might tire hereafter; and if he
did not tire, I should. No, Beryl, put me aside altogether; marry for yourself,
if you marry at all. Consider whether you could be happy at the Park. Remember
all Mr Werne can give you; how fond he is of you; how good and honest and true
he is, and then decide. Only remember that your decision can in no possible way affect my future."
"Louisa, papa -"
"Put us both out of the question, Beryl.  If there were no such people as
Louisa and myself in the world, would you marry Mr Werne? If you would, marry
him now; if you would not, do not marry him under any false idea of benefiting us."
"I like Mr Werne very much," said Beryl, firmly. 
"If you only like him, Beryl, you could never be happy as his wife."
"It is a great deal to cast aside, papa," she said, "wealth, and standing, and
freedom from anxiety, but if you would not stay on here I should care for
nothing; I should hate the Park with you away from it; I should detest living
if you were struggling with poverty; I should be always wanting to get free again and follow you."
How would it end? George, in his excitement, rose up and listened eagerly for
Mr Molozane's next words, which urged Beryl to consider well before she cast
aside wealth and standing from her. 
With a pathos none the less touching because it was unconscious, Mr Molozane
told his daughter (beryl) of the roughness of the road that lay before them, of
the struggles they should have to make, of the poverty they should have to
encounter. He spoke of the comfort it would be to him to know Beryl was
suitably married. He said, that in the midst of all his troubles it would be a
satisfaction to him to know she was high and dry above the reach of want; he
told her precisely how he was situated, and what he proposed doing, and then he
left it to herself to say whether she cared sufficiently for Mr Werne to marry
him. "For that, after all, is the only question we have to consider," added Mr
Molozane, sorrowfully, "that is all."
"No, papa, that is not all," said Beryl; "what I want to know is, whether you
and Louey would stay on here? Whether you would have a share in my prosperity?
Say yes, papa; say yes."
"I can't say yes, Beryl," he returned, "when I mean no."
"You mean you would not let Mr Werne help you?"
"Yes."
"Not under any circumstances?"
"Not under any."
"You are quite sure, papa (mr molozane), you will not think differently at the end of six months?"
"I have thought about it for too many months not to know my own mind now,
Beryl; but you, my darling, you will not decide hastily? you will remember all
Mr Werne can give you, what a certainty of ease and competence you will have if
you marry him; what a terrible uncertainty of everything except poverty your
life will be if you refuse his offer? You will do nothing rash, Beryl; you will
take time to consider?"
"I have considered," answered the girl; "and if you insist that I shall
separate myself from you and Louisa, that I shall act solely and entirely for
myself, I cannot hesitate for a moment. I should have valued Mr Werne's wealth
for your sake; I should have loved him for what he would have done for you. I
could have made up my mind to be happy, and I should have been happy, but with
you away I should be miserable. I should repent my marriage every hour in the
day, and I should hate the place, and the money, and the show that tempted me to say yes."
"But you might feel differently in a year or two, Beryl," he suggested. 
"Should I?" she said. "If you believe that, papa (mr molozane), you know very
little about me, though I am your daughter."
"Besides," he went on, without regarding the interruption, "you must marry some day, and leave me."
"I never will," she said; "I will never go so far away that I cannot lay my
hand on you at any time. You do not really want me to marry Mr Werne; you are
only trying me; say you are trying me, papa."
There was no answer; nothing but a silence which supplied the place of all
words to George Geith; for he knew that Beryl had broken down at last, and was
crying out her perplexities on her father's neck. 
Never a silence proved more irksome than that to George Geith. Away in the east
he could see the moon rising from behind a bank of clouds. If she once emerged
from them, he should not be able to leave the terrace unnoticed; whilst, if he
passed the window and descended into the garden by the steps, he feared he
should excite observation. 
Like most listeners, he found himself placed in a nice dilemma: to his right
was a thick hedge of privet, to his left that inexorable window; whilst below
was a trellis-work, just too high to jump, covered with climbing roses. 
Nevertheless, George decided on leaping something; and accordingly, standing on
the bench and placing his hand against the wall of the house, he vaulted over
the privet hedge and alighted safely on the grass on the other side. 
Keeping well under the shadow of the hedge, he walked quickly on, never
stopping to draw breath till he was safe among the elms of the avenue leading
to Molozane Park. There he sat down to rest and to think. There were no regular
seats along the avenue, but amongst the underwood there were the stumps of many
old trees, and of one of these the accountant took possession, while he tried
to remember every sentence of the conversation, to recall every varying tone of Beryl's voice. 
She did not love Mr Werne; she would not marry him. Her father (mr molozane)
would not let her sacrifice herself for him. These three facts came out of the
conversation, and stood forth clear in George Geith's memory. Mixed with them
was a vague wonder at the girl refusing such a chance. In its way it seemed to
the accountant like a man declining to be made a king, and he marvelled at her.
So astounding indeed did it seem to him, that he left his seat and went to look
at the property she had refused, at Molozane Park, which, bathed in moonlight,
he could see from the end of the elm avenue. 
There lay the goodly lands that had been owned by the Molozanes for centuries;
there were the broad pastures, and the noble trees, and the silvery lakes, over
which the eyes of each successive owner looked; there was the great house,
white in the moonlight, in which the Molozanes had found it so easy to
accommodate guests. Back amongst the plantations lay the stables that the
Molozanes had once filled with hacks and hunters. To the south sloped the
gardens which the Molozanes had stocked with every rare fruit and flower. Never
a miser had there been amongst them; never a Molozane but had been a prince in
his hospitality, and royal in his expenditure. They had kept open house in the
days when their prosperity was at its zenith. A few servants more or less, a
few horses to spare, a more liberal table than was needful, what where these
things, what were these mere trifles to the Molozanes, whose income was so
regal, whose ideas were so kingly? 
And so they had gone on spending, for each succeeding generation inherited the
tastes, though not the income, of its predecessor; guests still came on; horses
still filled the stables; costliest exotics composed the bouquets of the ladies
who were always staying at the Park. There were carriages and servants, there
was feasting and revelry; there was riding, and driving, and flirting all the
day long; whilst ruin was stealing up to the house to oust the Molozanes  the
liberal, open-hearted, proud Molozanes  from their beloved home. 
Thus the years had passed, and from father to son, and from father to son the
Park had descended, more encumbered, less valuable than of old. 
Heiresses might have redeemed the Molozanes, but somehow these men, who wanted
money so much, always married for love, or beauty, or grace; and the heiresses
that fell in their way were none of them loveable, beautiful, nor graceful. 
So long as the place could be kept up, the Molozanes still galloped on, and
galloped down; till the property came to Ambrose Molozane, who married a woman
whom all the world. thought to be an heiress, but who brought nothing in her
hand to help to restore the ancient family to its old position. 
It was a very poor, shabby establishment, when contrasted with the
establishments which had gone before him, that Ambrose Alfred Molozane kept up
at the Park. His life had been a struggle with appearances, a fight with
poverty, a war against circumstances, a series of useless endeavours to
retrieve his position; which endeavours left him finally where George Geith,
looking out over the old possessions, sorrowed to find him. 
All the accountant's own pride of family rose up in rebellion against this man
of ancient blood having to make way for one of the newly rich  for a man to
whom the Park, with its thousand-and-one recollections, was a dwelling, nothing
more. It was just; it is the world's discipline that he who has worked through
the day shall rest in the evening, and that he who has not toiled in the spring
and summer of his life must work when his manhood's prime is past and age is
creeping on him; whilst it is God's unchanging law that the sins of the fathers
are visited upon the children, and that for years of thoughtless extravagance,
of lavish expenditure, of frivolity, and pleasure, and rioting, there shall
come a terrible day of reckoning, when there shall be tears instead of
laughter, sorrow in place of mirth. 
It was just, but it was pitiful; standing there, gazing at all that was passing
away from the Molozanes, there came swelling up in George Geith's heart all
that longing for possession, all that sympathy for the loss of possession,
which is so universal with man. Passing away from earth, there is nothing we
long to hold so much as earth. Land is a visible wealth; green fields, swelling
uplands, fruitful valleys are to the most of us what out-spread hoards of gold
prove to the miser  tangible evidences of wealth. 
But the green fields, and the waving trees, and the swelling uplands, and the
silvery lakes, were all passing away from the Molozanes,  passing away as fast
as poverty could drag them. A few weeks more, and the old place would fall into
other hands; strangers would be dwelling at the Dower House. In the familiar
rooms, new-comers would assemble; where Beryl's feet had passed, other steps
would follow; where her voice had made sweet ringing happy music, different
tones would enter discordantly. There might be laughing children, there might
be loving and wooing, but there would be never again a Beryl in the Dower House for ever. 
For ever and for ever. 
Could she cast it all away; could she tear herself from the old familiar
haunts, from her birthplace, from the home she loved, as we never love but one
home on earth; could she do this? It seemed so small a matter to marry, so
enormous an advantage to secure, that although George Geith had heard her say
she would choose poverty with her family, to the Park without them, he could
not realize that he had heard correctly  that he had heard her speak her
determination, without a shadow of turning in her voice. 
If she loved anyone else, he could understand her decision; but for a girl
whose fancy was free to throw away such a chance, seemed to George Geith incredible. 
At the moment he never paused to ask himself whether he would wed for houses,
and lands, and money, and position; whether he would not choose poverty and
freedom, rather than wed without love. He only thought of Beryl and Molozane
Park  thought and marvelled  until he finally worked himself round to the
belief that she would marry Mr Werne, and keep the property in the family. 
He was wronging Beryl  wronging her for the last time. 
Beside the roses, under the moonlight, Beryl was telling Mr Werne, at that very
instant, not without tears, for the girl's heart was sad both for him and for
herself, that she had made up her mind, and that it was impossible she could
become his wife. She liked him better then than she had ever done before. She
liked him for the way he pleaded his suit, for the intense love he could not
help revealing, for the hopelessness of his hopeless passion, for his gentle
tenderness, for his despairing grief. 
What to him were then houses and lands? What were bankers' balances and a
thriving business? What were the possessions of this world and the pleasures
thereof to the successful man at that moment, when the girl told him she could
not become his wife, that she could give him everything but love,  but love,
for want of which his heart was perishing? 
Then, like one dying of thirst in the desert, to whom all goods and all
treasures are offered, save water, he cried out in his anguish, showing her all
his suffering, all his cruel disappointment. 
"Could it never be?" he asked; "if he waited; if he had patience, would she not
have him for his very love's sake? Might this future never come?"
And Beryl, blinded with tears, choking with sobs, had to pause before she could answer "never." 
Never!  like a faint distant murmur it came stealing out of the lonely desolate
future  a future which no woman's love might ever illumine for him, no fresh
glory of hope ever lighten with even a momentary brightness. All the misery,
all the regret, all the unutterable loneliness of an empty heart, was coming
towards him, and "never" was the first faint sound which told of its approach.
It was the sighing sough of the wind that announces a tempest, against which
man must battle. It was the far-off grating of the wheel of the hearse which
comes to take his dearest and best away from his sight. It was death to every
plan, to every hope, to every joy; and in his agony Mr Werne could not help exclaiming: 
"Oh! Beryl, if it may never be; if we must part; I would to God I had never seen your face."
"Forgive me," she was crying helplessly by this time; crying among the roses,
under the moonlight. "If I have ever made you think I could be your wife, if I
have thought it myself, if I have ever done you a wrong, and led you to fancy
things might be different, you know what made me do it. Forgive me, though I
shall never, never, never forgive myself."
God help him. He learnt at that moment just what his wealth had done for him 
just what Beryl would have married him for, had she consented to become his
wife; and he stood for a moment silent, with her hand clasped tightly in his,
waiting till the pain should be overpast  till he could speak to her calmly and
steadily as he wished. 
"My child," he said at last  and, oh! how old he felt, and how young she
seemed, as he called her by that name  "it is my life that I have lost this
night; but I would not have you give me back my life at the price you imply. It
is over now; the hope, the fear, the long suspense; and I can let you go,
satisfied that you are right, that I was wrong."
But still he did not let her go. He only drew her nearer, closer to him,
whispering, whilst he trembled violently, "Kiss me, Beryl  kiss me for once."
Had George Geith been eavesdropping then, even he would have forgiven them
both. Some men do not find it easy to coffin their dead hopes; some women
cannot so readily help to pile the earth into the grave, as many think.
CHAPTER 32. IN LONDON.

It was a hard matter for a man like Mr Molozane to have to flee to
Basinghall-street for refuge; and how hard he had found his trial to bear, was
shown by hollow cheeks and grey hair, when he came forth from that sanctuary,
free of debt indeed, but penniless. 
The world was all before him; there was room enough in it to beg or starve; but
if he wished to earn a living for himself and his daughters (louisa) (beryl),
he had no choice save to stay in London, where Mr Werne obtained a situation
for him in the great shipping-house of Murphy, Dowsett, and Raikes, at a salary
of two hundred and fifty pounds per annum. 
Mr George Geith, who knew the rates at which the wealthy firm in question were
in the habit of paying their clerks (murphy dowsett and raikes clerks), never
believed in that two hundred and fifty at all; he thought the fifty without the
two hundred much more likely to be near the mark, and the accountant was
correct. The salary was a matter of arrangement between Raikes, the managing
partner, and Mr Werne, who fancied that Mr Molozane's business capabilities
were of the smallest, that, in fact, he would be only useful, as he said
frankly to Mr Raikes, to be a check on the junior clerks, and to answer civil
questions in a civil manner.
But in this Mr Werne proved to be mistaken. 
Mr Molozane had no idea of taking his money and doing as little as possible for
it, and he put his shoulders to the wheel in a manner which won for him the
cordial dislike of all the clerks in Messrs Murphy, Dowsett, and Raikes' employment.
To do nothing and be paid a salary for it, was their idea of perfect happiness;
to work before face and idle when their employer (mr raikes)'s back was turned
was their conception of duty; and accordingly, the sight of a middle-aged man
(mr molozane) setting himself to learn all the ins and outs of the business
with a will, being punctual to his time, being honest in his occupation, filled
the young fry with unspeakable disgust. 
But to their good or bad opinion Mr Molozane was equally indifferent: by work,
he and his had for the future to live, and though business was work he
detested, though he disliked his employment, his position, and his employers
(murphy dowsett and raikes), he never slackened in his efforts, but laboured on
for the sake of the young girls who were dependent on him. 
At the top of the Caledonian Road, beyond the Cattle Market, there is still, (I
the narrator) believe, a place called Stock Orchard Crescent, and there the
Molozanes pitched their tent. 
The house was of Beryl's finding, and (I the narrator) doubt if, all things
considered, she could have found a better.
To be sure, even then the place had its drawbacks, but the situation was quiet,
the houses were semi-detached, the rooms were large for London, and the rent not excessive. 
Mr Molozane could walk from thence to Leadenhall Street, and the girls (beryl)
(louisa) could readily get into the country. Highgate was not far off, Hornsey
and Crouch End were accessible; and all the new villas, terraces, and streets,
that now cover the Seven Sisters' Road, and the upper part of Holloway, were undreamed of. 
Into her new home Beryl carried the same happy face, the same courageous heart,
the same power of adaptation, which had won George Geith's heart in the old
days departed. She had wept out her tears; and in the spring time of life, as
in the April of the year, sunshine follows cloud. Over Molozane Park, over the
Dower House roses, over the familiar household goods that had been carried from
before her face to strange and unfamiliar places, she had rained showers of
sorrow; but the trouble was now gone and past; the pain had been endured and
was over; and in the happiness of having her father with them again, in the
busy little cares of housekeeping, in the occupation of making both ends of
their income meet, Beryl, safe on land once more, forgot the fury of the storm
she had breasted, and commenced extracting such pleasure as was possible from
the new life in which she was just starting. 
To a nature like Beryl's, if (I the narrator) may say so without detracting
from any favourable opinion my readers may entertain of her, furnishing was a
delicious employment, a charming amusement, which had not fallen to her lot
previously. Even had she been compelled to cut and contrive, to grudge
carpeting here and curtains there, shopping and arranging on the most limited
scale would have possessed the greatest fascination for her; but as it was with
money, absolute wealth, at her back, Beryl revelled in upholstery, and walked
about London as happy a& the mistress of ten thousand a year. Had the girl
known where the money really came from, which filled her purse and paid for her
various little purchases, she would not, (I the narrator) think, have gone on
her errand with quite so light a heart; but she had accepted the sum which
furnished their new home, and left besides something over for a rainy day, in
perfect good faith from her sister, Mrs Richard Elsenham, in whose hands Mr
Werne had placed it before he went abroad to try if there were any balm in
absence for a broken heart. 
Matilda's honesty had been subjected to a severe test by the trust Mr Werne
reposed in her. Her necessities were many, her supplies scanty, and the evil
one had put so many pretty trinkets, heavenly bonnets, and enticing dresses, in
her way just about the time the money was left with her, that she felt if she
had not hastened to place the whole amount in Beryl's keeping, she never,
never, never could have resisted the temptations which beset her. 
Further, Beryl's thanks were very trying to a person who knew how little she
merited them. Albeit a fashionable lady, a spendthrift, selfish woman, Matilda
had a species of conscience which pricked her when Beryl burst into tears, and
begging "Tilly's pardon for every hard thing she had ever before said or
thought of her," declared "this money would make all the difference to them
between wretchedness and happiness."
"We can take a house and furnish it, and get out of these miserable lodgings,"
went on the poor little thing, counting off all the blessings she saw looming
in the future, on her fingers; "but, Tilly, are you sure you do not want it? I
will only take half; I can manage nicely on half, and it is too much: you are
too good and generous, my darling."
With her cheeks on fire, Mrs Richard Elsenham implored her sister "not to
mention it." She would, to do her justice, have liked nothing better than to
tell her how small a share she had in the good work; but being bound to
secresy, and knowing, moreover, the present would have made Beryl wretched had
she known the source whence it proceeded, she merely stated that the money had
been given her to do what she liked with, and that she liked beyond anything to
see Beryl happy, and her father comfortable. 
"I would give the world," she said, "to be able to be the blessing to anybody
you have been, Beryl, and to have anybody love me as people love you;" which was perfectly true. 
During her interview with Mr Werne, the beauty (Matilda Molozane) had thought
that if such a man had loved her as he loved Beryl  such a man with such an
income  she might have been a very happy woman. 
As it was, Mrs Richard Elsenham was not a happy woman, and Beryl left the house
greatly delighted with the state of her finances, but sadly down-hearted
concerning her sister's tears and mournful little speeches. 
Then commenced house-hunting and house-furnishing; what miles Beryl travelled;
what numbers of house-agents she consulted; what scores of omnibuses she
entered; east, north, west, and south she travelled, to settle on Stock Orchard
Crescent at last, to George Geith's dismay. Her chosen residence was too near
the Bemmidges to please him. "He did not think Stock Orchard Crescent a nice
place," he said, "and was certain that old-fashioned house at Hackney, with the
large garden, would have pleased Mr Molozane far better. For his part, he
disliked Holloway intensely, and he could not imagine what the young ladies
(beryl) (louisa) saw in it to fancy. He advised Hackney. The house was a better
house, and the rent no higher."
But in this matter Beryl was firm. Louisa did not care for Hackney; she had
seen that charming locality on a wet day, and took up a prejudice against it.
The house looked dull; the garden damp; the rooms were dark; the kitchen
wretched; there were no good pantries; the situation was not good. Louey was
sure she could never exist in that brick prison; and on the other hand, Louey
felt confident she should feel at home in an hour in Stock Orchard Crescent. 
"She has been amusing herself arranging how all the furniture is to stand,"
finished Beryl; and George Geith knew that settled the matter. 
The Autocrat of all the Russias might have issued his edict in vain to Beryl,
after Louey had spoken. 
"Hang the precocious chit!" muttered the accountant, as he walked away from
their lodgings; but he spoke out of his anger, rather than out of his heart. In
the days to come he was glad to remember Beryl had suffered her sister (louisa)
to choose for them; he was glad to recollect every step of his wretched way had
been determined on by others, rather than by himself. 
After Whitecross Street, any home would have seemed delicious to Mr Molozane;
how much more the cheerful, pleasant home where Beryl, her sister, and one of
their former servants were located. Something of Beryl's happy temperament must
have come to her from her father, for he sat down under the shadow of the
fig-tree, which had grown for him in this strange land, contented and unrepining. 
"Dare I murmur," he said, in answer to some involuntary expression of
admiration from George Geith, "while so much is left me: health to work, and
work to do, and children (beryl) (louisa) to work for? I thought at one time I
never could have parted with the old place and lived, but we never know how
much we can bear till we have borne it."
Listening to him, the accountant thought that we also never know how much other
people can bear, till we have seen them carrying their burden. He had wondered
in the days gone by how Mr Molozane would endure bankruptcy and beggary. He had
pictured all kinds of possibilities, save always a situation in the City and a
house at the top of the Caledonian Road. The position was too commonplace and
comfortable for him to realize, and so for a time George Geith felt Beryl's new
home to be a myth, and the increase of happiness it brought to him incredible.
Never a man in London did the accountant envy in those days after the Molozanes
took possession of their new house. He might have lived with them had he liked
to avail himself of Mr Molozane's numerous invitations. 
No more solitary evenings for the once lonely man; no more weary Sundays with
endless peregrinations over stony-hearted streets. There was a welcome always
for him when he chose to go and get it. He had a home, the door whereof was
always open to him. Let the day be never so dull and weary, there was light and
warmth waiting for him at the top of the Caledonian Road, if he took the
trouble of walking thither for it. 
He had not now to travel to Hertfordshire to hear the music that charmed him
most. Like the chiming of sweet bells, the tones of Beryl's voice rang in his
ears continually. There was no more winter for him, no more frost and snow. The
sun shine had travelled from the Dower House to gladden his heart, and the man
was so happy that his life seemed to be passed in fairyland. 
As for Beryl, any one might have thought she had taken a new lease of
enjoyment, that she had gained an inheritance instead of losing all she and
hers had been proud and careful over, too proud and too careful, alas for them.
There was no trace of sadness about her, no want of elasticity in her
movements, no decrease of vivacity as she discharged her familiar household
duties. If the past had worn any darksome channels in her heart, the glad,
bright, full stream of youth, sparkling on its way, hid all traces of trouble
away both from her own sight and that of her neighbours. It is when years have
dried up the once-abundant waters of gladness, when there is no musical brook
gliding onward to meet the future, when there is no green sward on the banks,
no gushing spring of hope left to replenish the bed once filled to overflowing
by the restless chattering river, that age, looking at the furrows worn in that
bygone time, understands fully how much can be suffered by youth, which youth
happily forgets to remember. 
It was thus with Beryl, at any rate. Her troubles were dead and coffined, and
she revisited not their graves. In- some stratum of her nature each grief she
had suffered was lying away hidden like a fossil; but like the fossil of an
ancient world, were all past sorrows to the girl who lived in a perpetual
sunshine, in an unchanging noon, where no shadow fell. Fond of the country as
she had been, 'tis a truth which must be confessed, that Beryl liked London
amazingly also. She had detested Kensington and her grandmother (maria
elsenham), but a house in London which held her father (mr molozane) and sister
(louisa), and unbounded personal liberty besides, was quite another affair. 
Dare (I the narrator) confess that she delighted in the shops in Upper-street,
that the crowds of people, the countless conveyances, and the eternal
excitement, charmed her beyond description? London to her was a great theatre,
with perpetually shifting scenes and actors. 
It was a new world, containing a race of men hitherto undreamed of. The pace
was so fast, it suited her active spirit; and she danced about the rooms of
their new home, along the broad hall and up the staircase, with light feet and
a lighter heart, in time to the strains of the barrel-organs that infested
Stock Orchard Crescent on account of its reputed quietness. 
In after days, when that house was again to let, George Geith went and paid the
care-takers to allow him to go over the well-remembered rooms alone. Through
every apartment he. wandered, and at last returned to the drawing-room, which
he re-furnished and re-peopled out of the storehouses of memory. 
To him it was bare and desolate no longer. In his fancy he saw her sitting
before him, with the sunshine streaming on her hair; he heard the tones of her
voice; he saw her bright, happy smile; he beheld the caressing hand stretched
forth to touch Louey as she passed. Every picture hung in its wonted place; the
very perfume of her favourite flowers seemed pervading the air; the remembered
books and knick-knacks lay on the tables; and as he stood dreaming out his
dream, an Italian organ grinder struck up "Johnny Sands."
Many a time had he listened to Beryl lilting out that most absurd song* through
the now deserted house, but the strain provoked no answering smile from the
lonely listener. Ah, no! for as the air went ringing through the glad sun
shine, all his dream melted away, and left him standing in the dismantled room  desolate!
*"There was a man, named Johnny Sands, 
Who married Betsy Hague, 
Although she brought him gold and lands, 
She proved a terrible plague. 
She proved a terrible plague. 
"One day said he, 'I'll drown myself, 
The river runs below; 
'Oh do!' said she, 'you saucy elf, 
I wish'd it long ago.' 
I wish'd it long ago.
"Said he, 'If on the brink I stand, 
Will you run down the hill, 
And push me in with all your might?'
Said she, ' My love, I will.' 
Said she, ' My love, I will.' 
"'And lest that I should courage lack,
And try to save my life, 
Pray tie my hands behind my back.' 
'I will,' replied the wife. 
'I will,' replied the wife.
"Then down the hill his loving bride 
She ran with all her force, 
To push him in; he stepp'd aside, 
And she fell in, of course. 
And she fell in, of course. 
"Splashing, dashing, like a fish, 
'Oh! save me, (Johnny Sands)!' she cried; 
'I would, my love  I wish it much,  
But you my hands have tied.' 
But you my hands have tied."
CHAPTER 33. PLEASANT HOURS

It was not to be expected that the Bemmidges should long remain ignorant of the
arrival of Mr Molozane and family at Stock Orchard Crescent.
Mr Molozane was too often in Fen Court; Mr Geith sat too often on the
knife-boards of the Holloway omnibuses for shrewd conjectures not to be formed on the subject. 
"Take my word for it," said Mr Bemmidge, who never had been taken into the plot
of marrying George to his sister-in law (miss gilling), "that Geith has at last
found a house where he can hang up his hat;" and this opinion, which the
wine-merchant expressed gleefully, and to which the ladies listened in dismay,
received confirmation on the following Sunday afternoon, when Mr Geith was
encountered at Hornsey Rise, walking abroad with two young ladies (louisa) (beryl). 
"As plain-looking a pair as you would desire to meet," said Miss Gilling, with
a snort, "and dressed like Quakeresses. I should have thought Mr Geith would
have been ashamed to be seen out with such a couple of dowdies (beryl)
(louisa);" and Miss Gilling, against whom the charge of simplicity could not
have been brought by anybody, tossed her head disdainfully. 
"They live in Stock Orchard Crescent," remarked Mrs Bemmidge, "father (mr
molozane) and two daughters (louisa) (beryl), and are the people at whose house
he spent so much time the summer after he first came here."
"Well, there's no accounting for tastes," answered Gertrude. "I can only say
neither of them would be mine."
"Andrew says they have been great people," said Mrs Bemmidge, thoughtfully. 
"Andrew talks nonsense," snapped Miss Gilling, and there was a pause after this frank observation. 
"I was thinking of calling upon them," said Mrs Bemmidge, at length. "Andrew
says, knowing them has introduced Mr Geith to a first-rate business connection
(mr finch), and who knows but they might do something for us? I am sure, with
the children (bemmidge children) growing up, any person who could bring orders
would be worth cultivating."
"I don't know who would give orders for blacking if they had to drink it,"
answered Miss Gilling. To which Mrs Bemmidge replied: 
"You and mamma (mrs gilling) never refuse to take it, at any rate, when it is
offered to you." A remark so undeniably true, that it induced Miss Gilling to
turn the conversation. 
"I wonder what kind of style they live in? "she said, ignoring her sister's last observation. 
"You can see, if you like to call upon them with me," answered Mrs Bemmidge;
and the pair called accordingly upon Miss Molozane, greatly to Miss Molozane's astonishment. 
Avowedly, they came as friends of Mr Geith, and Beryl felt naturally a little
disappointed in Mr Geith's friends; but when once that gentleman had told her
all he knew about them, she rested satisfied, and began taking amusement out of
her new acquaintances, as she did out of everything else that came in her way. 
Not an atom proud was my heroine. If the absence of pride be a fault, (I the
narrator) am sorry for it; but she was not proud, nevertheless. Somehow she
identified herself so little with her acquaintances; in her own mind, in her
own hopes and happiness, she stood so entirely aloof from those with whom she
was thrown; knowing people was an affair so entirely outside of herself, that
she never gave the matter of gentility a thought; poor though they might be,
the Molozanes had always been the Hertfordshire Molozanes, and, as such,
Molozanes with an assured station; and the old saying, that a cat may look at a
king, holds equally true conversely  without any loss of dignity a king may
look at a cat; and without any loss of caste in her own eyes, Beryl looked at
the Bemmidges, took them for grist, and ground them up, for George Geith's
delectation, in her ridicule mill. 
From Mrs Gilling to her youngest grandchild (baby bemmidge), Beryl could take
off every turn of expression, every peculiarity of manner. She knew Mrs
Gilling's favourite preachers and platters of food, off by heart. She could
tell to a nicety whether the dinner Mrs Gilling had "dropped in" to partake of
at her daughter (mrs bemmidge)'s had pleased her or not, whether she had had
her due share of the crackling, and if the stuffing had proved to her taste. 
"I think they must live on pork," Louey observed. "We have never called there
yet that there has not been an all-pervading smell of grease and onions. We
stopped there once for 'lunch," as Mrs Bemmidge called it, but I will never
stop again; Beryl may if she likes; I think she found her pudding very nice."
"So nice that Amy finished it," observed Beryl; "what nasty children they are
(bemmidge children). They would pick up pieces of pudding out of the cinders, I
do think. I should like to have Amy here for a day, just to see what she would
eat if she had her own will."
"I hate that child," said George, emphatically. 
"That is ungrateful," observed Louey maliciously, "for she told us the other
day she was very fond of you, and that you would be her uncle when you married
Miss Gilling  oh! Beryl, forgive me  I forgot. I did not mean to tell him  I did not indeed."
"You need not vex yourself about the matter," George answered, looking as he
spoke at Beryl, who was laughing and blushing at one and the same time; "I
shall certainly be the brat (amy bemmidge)'s uncle when I marry Miss Gilling,
but that will be never."
"I should not like you if you married her," said Louey gravely. "I am afraid
all friendship would be at an end between us."
"I shall not subject your friendship to so severe a test," George replied,
amused in spite of his annoyance; "for I think Miss Gilling would as little
suit me as I should suit her."
"Although she sings so beautifully?" said Beryl demurely. 
"Beryl can sing so like her, that when I shut my eyes, I think it is Miss
Gilling, and am afraid to smile," said Louisa. "She was here the other day
squalling, and a little boy out in the street did one of her roulades after her
so exactly, that Beryl had to go out of the room. I wish I could draw, Mr
Geith. I would give anything to be able to sketch Miss Gilling at the piano.
"Whereupon the accountant sat down and produced a caricature of the young lady,
curls and all, which would surely have delighted Miss Gilling, could she have seen it. 
"I like that young man she is really going to marry," said Beryl, as George
proceeded with his task, Louisa helping him by looking over his shoulder the
while. "He is one of your clerks, is he not, Mr Geith? Mr Foss, I mean."
"Is Foss going to marry Miss Gilling?" asked George, pausing, and looking up
with a sudden expression of displeasure. 
"I do not know; I suppose so," stammered Beryl, who saw she had made a mistake
somehow; "I think he must be going to marry her."
"Why do you think so?  that is, if I may ask such a question?"
"Because  because  how you do tease one, Mr Geith. I do not know why I think
it, and besides I may be quite mistaken."
After which answer, spoken pettishly, Beryl relapsed into silence, and refused
to laugh at Miss Gilling's portrait when it was finished. 
"We must be careful what we say to Mr Geith about the Bemmidges," she remarked
to her sister afterwards. "I hope I did not do any harm by what I told him. I
wonder why he did not want Mr Foss to marry 'Jurtrude?'" marvelled Beryl,
mocking Mrs Gilling's pronunciation of her daughter's name. 
"I fancy I can guess," said Mr Molozane, looking up from his newspaper, in
which he had not been so absorbed but that he could listen to his daughters'
conversation; "he thinks Miss Gilling may learn too much about his business
from Mr Foss, and I think he is very likely to be right; not but what he is
doing so well that I should have imagined it could make little difference to
him who knew he was getting on."
"Is Mr Geith rich then, papa?" asked Beryl. 
"Not rich, but growing rich," was the reply; and Mr Molozane resumed his paper,
whilst the girls (louisa) (beryl) pursued their several occupations in silence.
The eldest (beryl) was, as usual, engaged in needlework; the youngest (louisa),
according to custom, writing, for she was strong again, and her family allowed
her to amuse herself in her own way, without let or hindrance.
Sometimes, indeed, when her face got flushed, and her hands began to tremble,
Beryl would essay to entice her from her manuscripts, but as Louisa grew older
she grew less manageable, and would push her sister away, saying, with tears lying on her cheeks: 
"Go away, Beryl, you come between me and them; I can't see them while you are standing there."
"I wish you would not talk like that," Beryl sometimes ventured to expostulate. 
"Talk like what? It is true; I do see everybody I write about a great deal
plainer than I see you now. There, they are all gone; and what I had to say is
gone. You have spoiled one of the best passages I ever wrote. I shall have to
go to my own room if you do not leave me alone."
And at last, for very peace' sake, Beryl did leave her alone, and let her write
verses to her heart's content. 
Very gradually both father (mr molozane) and sister (beryl) were coming to
understand that there is something stronger than parental authority, than
affectionate solicitude; something which may lie in abeyance for a while, but
which ultimately will have its own way  genius. 
Almost in spite of themselves, a conviction forced itself on Mr Molozane and
Beryl, that the talent they had first ignored, and then striven to keep in
swaddling-clothes, was growing into a giant which should master them all. 
"If your sister's health keep good," said George Geith to Beryl, one lovely
summer's evening, when he overtook her in High Street, Islington, and they
walked ly.me together to Stock Orchard Crescent, "she will become a famous woman yet."
"But if her health should not keep good, Mr Geith," answered Beryl, "what fame
would compensate us for that?"
"She will write, in any case," was the reply, "so you must hope for the best,"
an easy matter with Beryl, who began from that time to build air castles as to
what Louisa's genius was to do for them. She knew she was not clever herself;
she knew there was nothing she did particularly well, no one accomplishment in
which she excelled; so, when once the idea took firm and full possession of
her, that Louey was going to achieve "great things," she dwelt upon it in the
sure conviction that someday "papa (mr molozane) would be able to rest again,
that Louey's verses would in the long run bring her in a golden harvest."
Twelve months after they came to London, hope began to have some tangible food on which to exist. 
Spite of Miss Gilling's strictures on their plainness, the two sisters (beryl)
(louisa) were really very pretty girls, and their blushing country faces gained
them much favour in the eyes of publishers. 
There is not much gold lying about the base of the hill of fame; and Louisa
Molozane, spite of her eager exertions, found none of the precious metal at
all; but she got what was almost as good to her  praise, encouragement in the
present, assurances of success in the future. 
She had kindly notes from editors, favourable opinions from "(Louisa's
readers)," confirmatory smiles from publishers. Poems were not saleable
articles, and tragedies could not be thought of; but still, "when she directed
her attention to other branches of literature," "when she began to write short
tales, for instance," there was no fear of failure. She had genius, she had
youth. Let her read more and write less, said many a good-natured adviser, and
she would yet be one of the first authoresses of the day. 
Such was the sum and substance of a statement made to Beryl by an editor whom
she had the happiness of seeing personally. At first he took her for the owner
of the manuscript for which she called, and was more reticent of his remarks;
but upon Beryl assuring him she could not write anything more ambitious than a
letter, and that "not a long one," she added, he gave his opinion in extenso,
and sent the girl away so happy that she could have danced the whole way up to
the top of the Caledonian Road, had she not feared scandalizing the passers-by. 
By degrees also Mr Molozane came to be associated with his daughter (louisa)'s
literary efforts. He began by letting her repeat scraps of her verses as they
sat in the firelight, or toiled in the summer twilight up Highgate Hill, or
wandered through the green fields round about Hornsey and Crouch End, places
that are almost built up to now, but which were then miles and miles away in the country. 
In those days father (mr molozane) and youngest-born (louisa) were so much
together, that had Beryl been of a jealous temperament she might have thought
herself hardly done by, but the girl never felt anything but thankfulness that
"papa and Louey were so happy, that he was coming at last to understand her
writing, and to like her doing it."
Out of the past there have been always a few things standing that have seemed
unutterably pitiful, things that (I the narrator) have either seen myself, or
that have come to my knowledge through others, and not the least pitiful
appears the picture that now rises before me, of that poor, proud father (mr
molozane) wandering about London with a bundle of his daughter (louisa)'s
manuscripts in his hand, manuscripts which were invariably returned to him unaccepted. 
Often and often, as time went by, George Geith wondered how it would end, into
what port the manuscripts now floating rudderless would drift at last, and
whilst the Molozanes grew more eager, more confident, he became less satisfied
about the probable result, and began to speculate whether Louisa's talent,
though certain, might not be likewise unmarketable. 
It was an idea he was not able to shake off. Till Mr Molozane took the matter
up, George had not troubled himself as to how it would all end; but he could
not endure to see the ruined gentleman commence building such hopes on Louisa
as he had built on the Sythlow Mines unless they were certain of fruition. 
As he met Mr Molozane hurrying off in his dinner-hour to the Row or the Strand;
as he found him in the evenings carefully copying out Louisa's poems; when he
saw the looks of pride the man was continually casting on the tall, slight girl
(louisa) who had so shot up since George Geith saw her, the accountant felt
that disappointment would be something too terrible for them to face. 
Often when he was talking to Beryl, he tried to discover whether the idea of
failure had ever presented itself; but Beryl was so provokingly sanguine, that
no doubts could be instilled into her; and it was so pleasant to him to listen
to her hopeful chatter; her happy face seemed to her lover so lovely, that he
never had the heart to tell her he considered the result of Louisa's labours problematical. 
Happy days were those for all that little band happy for father and daughters
and for guest. There was no cloud on the horizon, no haunting dread in their
minds, no sign of tempest in the sky; nothing had as yet occurred to trouble
the peaceful current of their lives. There was no symptom of delicacy about
Louisa now. Mr Molozane seemed to be growing young again. Beryl looked a little
weary perhaps at times, but what of that? George hoped soon to be able to take
all responsibility off her shoulders. He was only waiting to propose formally
until he had a certain sum in hand over and above the income he made annually
out of figures. He had little fear but that ultimately Beryl would listen
favourably to his suit. He felt sure Mr Molozane would look kindly on him for a
son-in-law. At first he intended to take a house in or near Stock Orchard
Crescent, unless, indeed, Beryl wished to remain under the same roof with her
father, in which case he would not cross her inclination. 
All the mad fever of fear and hopelessness was over, and George Geith, the
successful man of business, merely waited the result of one or two speculations
before asking Beryl to be his wife. 
It was then late in the autumn, and ere Christmas he hoped to be visiting in
Stock Orchard Crescent as a future relative. He liked going there as a friend;
but his heart throbbed joyfully at the anticipation of something nearer, closer still. 
He had worked for this; he had been silent for it; and in the depths of his
stern, reserved nature lay the consciousness that in the sweat of his brow he
had expiated his former errors, and earned the prospect of his present felicity. 
Some memory of that past, some thought that possibly a few particulars which
could not be inquired about by a friend, might be asked by a future
father-in-law, had perhaps contributed to a certain tardiness in his suit. He
had wanted to feel his footing certain before he ventured on another step; and
now he mentally praised himself for his caution, and began to shape more
tangibly the future of his life. 
Even as the young authoress dreamt her dreams, so George Geith dreamt his; and
as the time drew on for fruition to crown his hopes, happiness more
swift-footed than he crossed the Molozane's threshold, and brought acceptance
of one of Louisa's often-rejected pieces to the family.
 "To be sure it was not to be paid for, but the money is certain to follow,"
said the girl, with a little of her old air of sober wisdom; and she turned
again to her writing-table to pen quires more poetry, on the strength of having
disposed of four verses of rhyme. 
"Money is certain to follow," repeated Solomon (Louisa), after she had been
writing for a long time; "it is a mere question of time," and she covered her
happy face with her hands. "It is coming, Beryl; I feel it, and then shall we
not do grand things? I am a little tired to-night; shall we build castles,
Beryl? when I am a great authoress, where shall we live? when I have a thousand
pounds, what shall we do with it?"
What would they not do? that was rather the question. A hundred thousand would
not have bought all they mentally purchased, sitting in the firelight glow. 
Molozane Park, or at least the Dower House; a house for papa (mr molozane); a
pony phaeton for themselves; furniture ad lib. "What colour should you like the
drawing-room curtains?" asked Louisa.
 "We would have everything just as it used to be."
"Except that you would not mind setting a room aside for me and my rubbish, as
you used to call it," laughed Louisa. 
"I think I will give you a room when you make money enough to buy the house," answered Beryl. 
"Wait a little longer," said Louisa, "and you shall see what you will see," and
so, hand clasped in hand, they chattered on, seeing all things in the future,
save the reality which was approaching them; building all kinds of fancy
habitations save those in which they were really to dwell. 
Thinking of them, but children as they were, tracing out so fair a path, (I the
narrator) am loth to tell of the roads they had separately to travel.

CHAPTER 34. THE BEGINNING OF TROUBLE. 

Misfortunes never overtake us at the expected time; they never come from the
expected source. It is never the storm we have been looking out for which
upsets our craft on its way over the billows of life; it is always some tiny
leak, some treacherous rock, some strange collision, which shipwrecks us in the end. 
We look anxiously towards the dark cloud, which we expect to pour out its fury
on us; but, behold, the cloud passes away in another direction, and the storm,
when it comes, bursts upon us in the midst of sunshine, in the midst of joy. (I
the narrator) think the vagaries of trouble are the strangest things in this
strange world. The way in which the cup of happiness is dashed from one; the
way in which the cup of sorrow is filled, dribble by dribble, for another. Here
grief lies in wait; there it seems trying the experiment of how much humanity
can bear: into one house it swoops with some tremendous sorrow; into another it
creeps little by little, bringing now one ill, now another, till it has
accumulated the pyramid of misfortune to a satisfactory height. 
And how often we find, also, that just when the poor human bark thinks it is
sailing into calm waters, after tossing over rough and dangerous seas, it goes
down amongst the breakers. Within sight of the promised harbour, the heart
sinks with all its freight of hope, and expectation, and content. 
"We have borne so much," says humanity, "we have encountered such rough
weather, we have breasted so many gales, that no more can fall to our share.
The clear sky and the favouring breeze will be with us now to the end." But,
even as it says this, the waves are rising and the great deeps of trouble are
opening to engulf their prey. 
It was thus at any rate with the Molozanes. Never had their prospects seemed so
good; never had they felt so thoroughly free from anxiety; never had health
been so perfect, nor had happiness been so full, as during that autumn, when
Louisa found herself at last on the direct path into print. 
They looked around and saw no spot in the heavens to cause apprehension. They
reflected, and came to the conclusion, that after long anxiety, after terrible
suspense, after brave fighting, they had earned their rest and their sunshine.
They listened, and the only tidings of evil that reached their ears, seemed so
far removed from them, that they never dreamt of connecting it with themselves.
"Mr Werne is dead," announced Mrs Elsenham in a severe manner to Beryl. He died
of fever, at Paris, on his way back to England. Ah, Beryl," proceeded the
straightforward old lady, "if you had played your cards well, you might now
have been a rich young widow."
And when (I the narrator) say that Beryl refrained from remarking, "It is not
everybody who is so lucky as you, grandmamma," the reader will know that the
news of Mr Werne's sudden death did touch and move her exceedingly. 
As her grandmother lamented over the chance she had lost, Beryl's thoughts went
away back to that evening, at the Dower House, when amid the roses he pleaded
for her love, and pleaded in vain; but they never travelled forward, never
connected his death with the events of her own future. And yet, within a
fortnight after the news reached England, the first misfortune that had as yet
befallen them, came to Stock Orchard Crescent in the shape of an intimation
from Raikes, that on and after the first of December following, the firm of
Murphy, Dowset, and Raikes would not require the services of Mr Molozane. 
"And what their reason can be, what I can possibly have done or undone, I know
no more than the babe unborn," remarked the poor gentleman to Mr George Geith.
"Can you guess at all?" he went on, "you know more about business people, and
have some idea of their rules of action; for myself, I am quite at sea, I am
bewildered, confounded." And Mr Molozane looked despairingly out into the old
churchyard of St Gabriel as he spoke. 
"Did Mr Raikes assign no reason for your dismissal?" asked the accountant.
 "None whatever; he merely said, 'Mr Molozane, we purpose making some changes
in the office, and I regret to have to tell you that in consequence of those
changes we shall be unable to retain your services after the first of December.'"
"And you?" suggested Mr Geith. 
"I asked him if he had any fault to find with me. 'Fault  not the slightest,'
he answered. 'You have been exemplary in your hours, careful in your work, and
eager to forward our interests. It will give me the greatest pleasure to see
any person you may refer to me. Anything I can do for you, Mr Molozane, you may
rely on,' and with that the interview ended."
"But did you not ask him why he was parting with you?" demanded George, in amazement. 
"How could I inquire into their private arrangements?" was Mr Molozane's reply.
"He said they had no fault to find with me; and whether that answer was true or
false I had no alternative but to believe, or seem to believe, his statement."
"I think they had one fault to find with you," remarked George, drily. 
"Fault! what fault?" asked Mr Molozane, turning from the window. 
"You were too dear."
"You mean my salary was too high?"
"Precisely," answered the accountant. 
"But it has never been increased; and I am surely worth more to them now than I
was when I first came to London."
"True, but Mr Werne was then living."
"What difference could that have made?"
"You will not be offended if I tell you the difference I think it might make."
"Certainly not. You think, perhaps, Mr Raikes fancied he could send them
business which would help to pay my salary."
"Perhaps Mr Raikes did think so, and probably Mr Werne did put good things in
his friend's way, but that is not all I mean; I never thought Murphy's people
paid you that sum out of their own pockets. I do believe, Mr Molozane, your
salary was a matter of arrangement between Mr Raikes and Mr Werne."
"I never dreamt of such a thing," muttered Mr Molozane, and he sat down to
realize George's idea at his leisure. "If it had occurred to me I should never
have gone there, never have accepted the situation."
"Be thankful, then, that it did not occur to you," observed the accountant. 
"How could I ascertain if your supposition be correct?" exclaimed the other (mr
molozane), vehemently. 
"Easily enough," was the reply; "remark to Mr Raikes that salary is not so much
an object with you, and that a hundred, or a hundred and twenty, would suit you
just as well as double that amount," and George, who had only the very faintest
hopes that Mr Molozane would follow his advice, pulled all the feathers off his
red-ink pen as he spoke. 
"I will do what you tell me," said the other, after a long pause, during which
he had been swallowing his pride and looking his position in the face. "I will
do what you tell me," and the result proved that Mr Geith's supposition had
been correct, for the great firm kept on their clerk (mr molozane), and the
changes in the office, so vaguely referred to by Mr Raikes, were not effected. 
Poverty, like sickness, compels men to swallow many a bitter mixture, and Mr
Molozane was obliged to drink this draught in silence. Even to Beryl he never
mentioned his suspicions on the subject of Mr Werne's generosity. Perforce he
had to tell her of the reduction in his salary, but Louisa's eager as
assurances that she should very shortly be able, not merely to make up the
deficiency, but to do a great deal more besides; robbed the announcement of
half its horror, and the young housekeeper (beryl) determined to put off the
commencement of any fresh economies at any rate until after Christmas. 
"I do not care what we have to do without, Louisa, if we can only keep things
nice for papa," she said. 
"And of course we can keep things nice for him, you unbelieving old lady,"
answered Louisa, laughing. "Look at that, Beryl!" she added, handing her over a
letter the (stock orchard crescent postman) had just delivered, "only look at
that. Another poem is accepted, and if I or any person authorized by me call at
the office of the 'Piccadilly Journal' I shall receive 'Two pounds three and
sevenpence.' And won't I call? Where would I not call if certain of two pounds
three and sevenpence for my trouble? Has not the antidote come with the bane
this time, Beryl? Is not a better door opened than the one just shut? And have
not I done something more at last than spoil paper and waste ink?"
In reply to which question, Beryl, foolish Beryl, sobbed aloud. 
"I shall go away this moment and get the money, and spend the odd sevenpence in
sweets for my crying baby," continued Louisa, whose own eyes were not so dry as
they might have been. "Will you come with me? Yes, that's a good child. Run
away and put on its bonnet and it shall have lollipops and sugar-candy." And
Louisa, who had still a very sincere liking for "sweets " herself, patted her
sister on the shoulder with the gravity of a middle-aged matron. 
Afterwards, when looking back upon her life, that day always stood out in
Beryl's memory separate from its fellows, for it was truly the beginning of her
troubles; the last time when with bright face and confident manner Louisa spoke
of the certainty of success. 
It was a day when neither of the girls had any business to be out (Beryl
acknowledged her folly before the night was over), cold, damp, and raw, misty
overhead, wet underfoot, a day to give coughs and sore throats, to breed
fevers, and to befriend doctors; a day the end of which was that, before the
next morning, Louisa awoke struggling from sleep, thinking that someone was
holding her fast by the throat, and suffocating her. 
Bronchitis was a complaint which Beryl had never seen, and of which she had
heard but little, nevertheless she knew quite enough of her sister's
constitution to be alarmed at the peculiar noise which accompanied each
inspiration, and at Louisa's reluctance to try any other than a sitting position. 
"I am afraid I am going to be very ill," she said, while her sister had so
arranged the pillows that she could lean back against them comfortably. "It is
my own fault, I brought it on myself, I got my boots soaked through directly we
went out, and I would not tell you, because you had wanted me to put on a
stronger pair, and I went on feeling the damp go through my bones till I was
perished to death; and the cold oil-cloth in that horrible office made me
colder still. I will never be stiff and obstinate again, Beryl; I will try to
do what you ask, for you have been mother and sister and everything to me; you
have, my darling, you have."
Would she have kept her promise had she lived, in great things as in small? God
knows. With all her heart and soul Beryl tried, when the hour of trouble came,
to feel what she believed, that He had taken her in mercy from the evil to come. 
Never had Beryl before so pleaded for any boon to be granted, as she prayed now
for Louisa to be spared. 
From the first, from the moment when Louisa woke her in the grey of the
winter's morning, a dull presentiment, a sinking fear, had never left her. When
no one else thought the girl so very ill, when even the (London doctor) felt,
or at least said he felt, no apprehensions about her, Beryl sat up with her at
night, and never left her by day, fighting against death, who was, she firmly
believed, only to be driven away by such love and such care as she could give to the sufferer. 
How the time passed, how the nights were endured, and the days lived through,
Beryl scarcely knew, so long was she in battling against her unseen foe; but at
length there came a morning, a dull, wretched November morning, when the
(london doctor), standing in the pretty drawing-room, and looking at Beryl
through the light of a yellow fog, said gravely: "We have got the bronchitis
under at last, (Miss Beryl), but"
She knew what was coming, though she had no power to help him finish his
sentence. She knew the worst that was coming, yet still, so long as it was
merely coming, it did not seem like reality. 
"She has never been strong, as I understood you to say," went on the (london
doctor), "and I greatly fear that she never will be very strong again. My dear
young lady, calm yourself. Pray, be calm."
"What do you mean?" asked Beryl, the tears streaming down her white cheeks, as
she asked the question: "Is it to be life or death for my sister (louisa)? Is
she ever to rise again  or  "
Something came across the girl as she said that "or," which prevented her uttering another word.
It was to be death, and she realized the fact. They were to fight a little
longer with the dim phantom that had been haunting her. They were to have
further advice. Doctors were to hold consultations. More remedies were to be
tried. More days and more nights were to be got through as such days and nights
may; but the end after all was to be the same  Death. 
Death to love, to hope, to all the sweet home ties, to all the pleasant plans
sketched out in the glowing firelight. No more life, no more labour, no more
striving, no more success. Beryl grasped the full extent of their wretchedness
in a moment, as she stood looking at the (london doctor), reading the still
unspoken sentence in his face. 
"And how I ever am to break it to papa (mr molozane), I do not know," she
moaned out to George Geith, who came in almost immediately after the (london
doctor)'s departure. "How he is to be told, I cannot imagine. When Olivia died,
Tilly thought he never would have got over it, and then we were at the Park,
and she died at home, and now  and now "
Beryl could talk no more about it. She felt in a vague kind of way that it
would have been easier for her to part with Louisa at the Park, or the Dower
House, than to lose her in the midst of the hurry and din of London. 
The tremendous loneliness and desolation of a great city  a loneliness never
felt till health and strength are going, and death is tremblingly expected in
the house, filled Beryl's cup of sorrow to overflowing. 
If she could have taken her darling (louisa) home, if she could have watched
her falling into the long sleep which knows no waking in the familiar room, the
poor child thought the trouble would have been more tolerable; but, as it was,
Beryl did not even make an attempt to fight with her sorrow, but rather resting
her aching head on her arms, which she had cast wearily on the table, she cried
to her heart's content, George never hindering her. 
What he would then have given to have spoken of his love before this trouble
came upon her! what he would have given to possess a right to take her in his
arms and kiss away her tears and comfort her in this great distress! but it was
too late for him now to remedy his over-caution, and accordingly he sat silent
till her grief should have expended itself, for he knew no form of words, no
manner of speech, which could touch a sorrow like this. 
It was in the dining-room they sat; Beryl had taken him in there so that her
sister, who lay in the front bed-chamber, should not hear their voices; and now
George, looking out into that dreary little garden, all bare of flowers,
unconsciously photographed for himself the scene and its accessories. 
The dead, blank wall, up which Beryl had tried to coax ivy, a Virginian
creeper, and the fast-growing westeria; the backs of the houses in the
Caledonian Road; the small grass-plot, looking muddy and sodden in the mist of
the November day; (Guess the dog), sitting in the middle of the plot on his
hind legs, vainly endeavouring to win some sign of recognition from the window;
(Royal the dog), in his kennel, lying there with his tail out, and his nose in
the furthest corner of his house, where he was privately gnawing a bone. 
The great, bushy tail kept slowly wagging to and fro, sweeping the wet gravel
from side to side, and whenever (Guess the dog) dropped from his begging
posture he turned a longing look to wards the retriever, whose labours he would
willingly have shared. 
From the street came the echoes of "All is Lost," which a barrel-organ was
droning out; from the kitchen ascended in shrill treble  
'I have come from a happy land, 
Where care is unknown."
And to the organ and to the song, like a dull, monotonous ac accompaniment,
Beryl's sobs rose and fell, rose and fell mournfully. 
"I did not think this would have been the end of it all, Mr Geith," she lifted
her head at last to say; "it seems so hard; it seems so hard; "and the girl
covered her face with her hands once more, while George tried, with unsteady
voice, to tell her something of God's ways not being as our ways, of His taking
oftentimes the youngest and best beloved soonest to Himself. 
"But He might have left us Louey," Beryl persisted; and that was all the
impression made by George's little sermon  a sermon he had then no heart to repeat.
After a time, too, he found that it was needful he should preach patience and
submission to himself, for he saw so much of Louisa during her illness, he grew
so fond of her, that at last he found, next to Beryl, he never had loved
anything before to the same extent. 
Dying, her greatest pleasure was to talk of the happy life hers had been  of
the flowers and the fields, and the trees she was to see on earth no more. 
It seemed to ease her pain, it appeared to while away the weary hours of
sickness, for her to speak of that dear old home in Hertfordshire to her
sympathetic listener. With the winter darkness outside the house, with the
shadows of death deepening within, she yet could see the summer glory bathing
the far-off landscape; could lie in the bed from which she was never more to
rise, and behold the sun steeping the familiar woods in floods of golden light. 
Beryl and home! While she had strength left to speak, it was of her sister and
her birthplace she talked. "From the time I can remember anything, I never
recollect Beryl being cross to me. When we used to be rolling our hoops she let
hers go down constantly, because I cried if she ran on faster than I. She was
always the same as you have known her, Mr Geith. If ever any one of us gave up
an amusement, that one was always Beryl. No matter how tired she might be, she
would run to get what papa wanted; or she would read to him, or sew for us. I
dare say many girls have done greater things, have had the opportunity of
making martyrs or heroines of themselves, but I do not think any girl or any
woman ever thought so little of herself and so much of other people as Beryl.
It seems to me now," she went on, "as if I never had loved her half enough. It
was not my fault, but I could break my heart at times thinking how it never was
large enough to hold all the love she deserved."
So Louisa would murmur, in her low, weak voice, which was never to be stronger
in this world, never, while George Geith listened, as a man was likely to
listen to such talk about the only woman on earth he loved (beryl). 
It was a pitiful death-bed, pitiful because of her quiet resignation, of her
childlike acquiescence in the fiat that had gone forth, of her love for father
(mr molozane) and sister (beryl), of her plaintive regret that she was not
allowed to stay and do something for them, of the thorough enjoyment she had
taken out of life, of the sweet, sorrowful memories she cherished of the
distant country fields and hedgerows, which she was to gaze on no more. 
She took it all so calmly herself, that but that they knew for certain they
were losing her, it would not have seemed to the father and sister like death.
Down the river she glided, without cry, without struggle, without lamentation,
and they, walking on the bank, talked to her as she floated away. 
During the first portion of her illness, Louisa's pleasure was to lie turning
over the only money she had ever earned, and calculating how soon she should be
able to work again, and make enough to defray all the expense she was causing;
but towards the end, when recovery seemed even to her impossible, she laid by
the business, and the pleasure, and the toys of life without a murmur, and
settled herself down to sleep at the bidding of her Almighty Father, as she
might have done in her mother's arms. 
Whilst for Beryl? All the other troubles she had met were as nothing to this.
Matilda's marriage, the loss of the Park, poverty, anxiety, seemed now such
trifles that the girl wondered she had ever fretted because of them. 
Human pity seemed so unmeaning, human help so useless, human consolation such a
mockery, her own poor strength such weakness, that Beryl must have sunk under
the trial but that God had mercy on her, and out of her love extracted the
power which enabled her to attend to the invalid and comfort her father without
faltering by the way. 
But for this, Beryl could scarcely have endured her misery. Friends came to
her, but what could friends do when Louey was dying? 
She would rather Matilda, and Matilda's carriage, and Matilda's husband, had
kept away from the house of mourning. Mrs Elsenham's footman, in his
resplendent livery, daily irritated her by useless inquiries. And regularly as
clock-work came the Bemmidges, whom Beryl often wished a thousand miles away. 
Mrs Gilling likewise paid many visits to Stock Orchard Crescent at this
juncture, offering to read to Louisa, and to bring her favourite minister (mrs
gilling's favourite minister) with her; but Beryl declined both offers, saying:
"Our clergyman is very kind to her, and she likes him greatly, and I I read to
her myself, Mrs Gilling, when I am able."
When she was able! Poor child! No one ever knew how, through the long, long
days and nights, she forced herself to be able to do) whatsoever her sister
(louisa) wished; how she listened to Louisa's talk about their old home without
weeping; how she kept the tears out of her voice as she read; how she sat
quiet, thinking silently, whilst the dying girl slept; how she was at this
juncture, more than at any former period of her life, the stay and support of those about her. 
Towards the last Louisa began to wander in her talk, and then those who loved
her best knew that her short earthly day was drawing to its close. Over that
close there fell no mist, no gloom, no darkness. All the time she had lived in
London seemed blotted out from her memory, for she never spoke of the hopes and
fears that had dwelt with her there; but was always muttering some sentence
about the Park or the Dower House. 
And the last words she whispered, with her head on her sister's shoulder, were:
"I think I have looked at that sunset until I am tired, Beryl. Take me home."
Then the Lord God Almighty, hearing that pitiful supplication, took her out of
Beryl's arms, home, to that City whose maker and builder He is. 
CHAPTER 35. DEFEATED. 

From the day of Louisa's death Mr Molozane never held up his head. When, after
the funeral, he left the lonely Hertfordshire churchyard, where they laid her,
it was to return to London a changed and broken man. 
Like Jacob of old "bereaved of his children, he was bereaved." And though he
went for a time about his former avocations; though he resumed his place in
Leadenhall Street, and discharged the duties of his position with as much exact
ness as ever, still he held on his way but as a man may run on for a time after
receiving his death-wound. 
Thinking of the day when he first entered his office in Fen Court, George Geith
found it hard to associate the Mr Molozane, who now crept up the passage after
business hours, with the portly country gentleman, who had once shaken hands
with the accountant, only because the accountant declined to accept his fee. 
"Whenever I can find an opportunity I will delay no longer," thought Mr Geith.
"I must do something for that poor old man, and I must see if my darling will
give me a right to comfort and protect her. Oh! Beryl, I wish to God I had
asked you to be my wife in the old days that can never come back again. I think
you would have had me, my own love. I think you would."
And George Geith, leaning his forehead against the mantelpiece, thought, as we
have all thought some time or other, about what "might have been."
Had Beryl married him, had they all lived together, had he taken Mr Molozane
into his own office, had he been less careful for her, less cautious for
himself, might Louisa not have been occupying her old familiar place? might not
this trouble have been averted? this life spared? 
God help us! How late it is in life before we come thoroughly to understand,
that though we may choose our paths, still it is He who directs our steps. 
Here was a man, not young, not inexperienced, still thinking about life and
death, joy and sorrow, as though these things had lain in the hollow of his
hand, to be dealt out at his pleasure. 
Here he stood in the room, which is at this hour but little changed since he
tenanted it, repenting over that which he considered an error of judgment in
the past, whilst he had no prevision of what the future was bringing towards him. 
In the future he would repair his error, he determined. He would speak to Mr
Molozane; he would strive to ascertain Beryl's feelings towards him  and then?
Why, then he would arrange his plans accordingly. So he decided, all
unconscious that his plans were being arranged without his help. 
One morning, in the early part of February, when Fen Court looked its
dreariest, the dismal churchyard its saddest, he received a note from Beryl
Molozane, stating that her father (mr molozane) was not well; that he was not
able to go to town; that she, Beryl, did not like his appearance, though the
(london doctor) said there was not much the matter with him. "I wish," she
finished, "you would get one of the best physicians you can hear of, to come
and see him. After Louisa "and there she seemed to have paused before
proceeding, "it is natural I should like to have the best advice at first."
It was so natural, that George Geith left all his other business to attend to
hers. He went to Stock Orchard Crescent with a physician, who charged five
guineas for the journey, and who would have been worth four times the money had
the disease happened to be one which human skill or human kindness could touch. 
"I may speak frankly to you," he said to George Geith, as they drove together
down the Caledonian Road. "There is no hope. Years ago, I might have done
something; but it is too late now; though the pain may be palliated, the
progress of the malady cannot be stopped. It would be false kindness to deceive
his family, though I could not help deceiving that poor girl whose life seems
bound up in his. There is no chance of recovery."
"How long?" George asked. 
"He cannot live three months," was the reply. 
"You are certain there can be no mistake? the (london doctor) who is attending
him said distinctly there was no cause for alarm."
"(london doctor) who is attending him may say what he pleases," answered the
great man, a little nettled; "but he knows as well what is the matter as I do.
The medicine he is sending is precisely what I should prescribe myself  a
palliative  and our profession do not use palliatives until remedies are considered useless."
"Would you be so kind as to set me down here," was all the comment the
accountant made on this piece of information. 
He had been deciding on his own course of action, and now wanted to get back to
the City to perfect it. 
If Mr Molozane were dying, every moment was of importance; if Beryl were likely
to lose her only natural protector within so short a period, the sooner he
spoke to her father the better. All the way to the City, through the wretched
lanes of Clerkenwell, along Fore Street, and London Wall, down Moorgate Street,
across Lothbury and the Royal Exchange, up Cornhill, through Leadenhall Market
to Lime Street, and thence to Fen Court, the accountant thought of nothing,
save Mr Molozane and Mr Molozane's daughter.
"I will do what I can this afternoon," he said to himself, "and get up there as
early as possible this evening. I will know the best or the worst now," and he
passed into Fen Court as he mentally uttered his decision.
Turning sharply up the passage, he ran against Mr Bemmidge. "I am so thankful
you have come back, Geith. I have been waiting for you these two hours. I could
not think where the devil you had got to. There is a run on Nortons', and
remembering your 500, I -"
Mr Bemmidge never was suffered to finish that sentence. What he did or said in
answer, George Geith could not in after days recollect, himself; and even Mr
Bemmidge could only dimly recall being pushed aside by the accountant, who ran
up the passage, mounted the stairs leading to his office, half-a-dozen steps at
a time, seized the papers he wanted, and then rushed down-stairs again, through
the passage and along Fenchurch Street like a maniac. 
Vainly Mr Bemmidge tried to overtake him. Regardless of danger, George left the
crowded side paths, and keeping in the horse-road, dashed among omnibuses, held
on by cabs, and crossed in the very teeth of lumbering vans as though he bore a
charmed life. Never a thief fled faster from justice than did this man to
rescue his all from the ruins. 
He could not have done it for a wager. Women and children scuttled out of his
way. Drivers pulled aside to let him pass. Seeing him run, a score of people
soon followed in pursuit, but he outstripped them all. A cry was raised of
"stop him!" but the passers-by might as well have tried to stop the Thames. 
Across Gracechurch Street, along Lombard Street, through the passage by the
post-office, over King William Street, round the corner of St Swithin's Lane
into George Street, thence past the back of the Mansion House into
Bucklersbury, where his journey was almost ended. 
Panting, struggling, pushing, cursing, he forced his way into Nortons', where
he flung his cheque on the counter, and with the perspiration streaming from
his face, waited for payment. His cheque was for ten thousand pounds, and one
of the clerks, an elderly man (elderly nortons' clerk), who wore spectacles,
and whose hands trembled as if he had the ague, began paying him in sixpences.
"Thirty-six, thirty-seven, thirty-eight, thirty -nine, one pound nineteen and
sixpence, sir. That is all I have. The bank has stopped payment." 
With an oath George pushed the money back across the counter, and the sixpences
fell over the other side, where they rolled about the floor. He snatched up the
cheque, and tearing it to bits, stamped on the fragments with his muddy boots,
and then he turned and left the place through a passage cleared for him by the
crowd, whose clamour had been silenced for a moment by a trouble which was
greater, an excitement that was fiercer, than their own. 
To George Geith, Nortons' failure was simply ruin; it frustrated every plan of
his life; it strangled every hope he had cherished; and when he walked out of
the bank and turned down Size Lane, it may surely be pardoned him that he
cursed the day when he ever set foot in the place. 
He did not speak curses, but he thought them; he made no outward sign, but he
mentally read a whole Commination Service over the heads of the firm, and
hurled anathemas at them. 
His money had been shared amongst earlier claimants; his money paid in not
three days before; his money that he had toiled for, struggled for, worked
early and late to gain; spent health and strength and the best years of his life to secure. 
His, and yet not his. If that money which he had just seen swept away had been
his own, his very own, the accountant's heart would not have stood still at the
thought of failure, defeat, and ruin, as it did. 
It was his, because out of what was his, he should have to make it good; yet in
another way it was not his, but trust money, which he should have to replace
within a week at the latest. He had believed Nortons' bank to be as safe as the
Bank of England, and behold! his belief had ruined him.
 He would have to commence again. Ten years older in age and twenty years older
in constitution, he would have to begin at the beginning once more, and toil
wearily up towards success. If Nortons' had stopped payment at any other time,
if it had been any week in the year but that week, his balance would have been
smaller, and he could have faced his loss with equanimity; but now, with that
enormous sum to replace, he must raise money at any cost, get in his capital at any sacrifice. 
And even at this price, could he make good the loss? Staggering down Size Lane,
with his hat pulled over his brows, stumbling at every step as if he were
drunk, clutching at the door-posts and the window-sills for support as he
passed by, George asked himself this question: 
How, too, about Beryl? He must give her up; he must never think more about
marrying her; he must relinquish all his dreams of a sunny, happy home. 
He had planted his flowers too soon, and they were dead; a single frost having
nipped and killed them, every one. 
The garden of his life was bare; it was all winter to him now, winter without the hope of spring. 
Everything he had longed for was now out of his reach for ever. Everything
lovely, and loving, and fair was swept away from his existence, and he should
have to pursue his onward path in a darkness like unto the darkness of the
Valley of the Shadow of Death. 
If he could die; if he could but die and be done with it; with the long
struggle, the weary toil, the pain, the fever, the sorrow, he felt he should be
thankful to God for the relief. 
And as he thought this, leaning against the wall of St. Antholin's Church the
while for support, a faintness like death came over him; the lights flickered
and swam before his eyes, the wet sloppy streets and the dull leaden sky alike
faded from his sight, and George Geith dropped in a heap on the pavement in the
midst of the passers-by.
CHAPTER 36. BARONET AND ACCOUNTANT. 
When George Geith awoke to consciousness, he found himself lying in a strange
bed, in an unfamiliar room, with Andrew Bemmidge standing on one side of him
and a (bemmidge's doctor) on the other.
"Where am I? have I been ill? what has happened?" asked the accountant,
faintly; but he remembered what had happened before his friend could answer,
and said, "I recollect  Nortons. How long have I been here?"
"Only a few hours. I brought you straight up in a cab."
"This is the evening of the same day, then," remarked the accountant. 
"My dear sir, you must not talk," here interposed the (bemmidge's doctor). 
"I must get up at once, at any rate," answered George. 
"Not if you value your life," was the reply.
 "I do not value my life at all," said the accountant, and he raised himself up
in bed as he spoke, only to fall back again the next moment weak and helpless on the pillow. 
"You have beaten me this time, (bemmidge's doctor), I believe," he remarked,
with a forced laugh. "If I obey your orders, and throw myself on your mercy,
how long will it take you to set me up? When can I go to the City?"
"Not for three days, at the soonest," was the reply, which caused the patient to groan aloud. 
"For Heaven's sake, keep yourself quiet," advised Mr Bemmidge, "and all will yet come straight."
"Much you know about it," snapped the accountant, savagely; and who may reprove
him for his incivility? 
"What amount are you in for?" asked his friend, while the (bemmidge's doctor),
whose curiosity was excited, refrained from crying out "Silence."
"Ten thousand five hundred and odd."
"Good God! what could induce you to keep such a balance?"
"The devil," answered George, and he turned on his pillow angrily. 
"There is no use in crying over spilt milk," he went on, after a pause; "the
shock seems to have floored me for the time being; it was enough to floor any
man; but all I want or ask now is strength to get up and see to my business as
soon as may be. So, whatever you, sir," turning to the (bemmidge's doctor),
"tell me to do, that I will try to do."
"Lie still, do not talk, do not think, if you can help it, take the medicine I
shall send regularly, and as much nourishment as you can swallow."
"Very good," acquiesced George. "Anything else?"
"Nothing, except to get a sound night's sleep, if possible;" and with this
advice the (bemmidge's doctor) departed, to have his place supplied by Mrs
Bemmidge and Mrs Gilling, the latter of whom announced her intention of
watching beside Mr Geith, in case any unfavourable change should occur before morning. 
It was all in vain that George protested he should sleep, that he should
require nothing, that he was perfectly certain there could exist no necessity
for any one's rest being disturbed on his account. Mrs Gilling was resolute,
and eventually took up her position before the fire, arrayed in such fearful
garments as George had never previously fancied could be worn by woman. 
It proved quite a mistake to suppose Mrs Gilling was the watcher; at a very
early period she fell off to sleep, leaving the invalid to see that her dark
lilac dressing-gown, the frills off the capes whereof might have been
judiciously added to the length, did not get drawn into the fire, and that no
part of the lace on her night-cap was set ablaze by the candles. 
How she snored! Lying awake, counting the hours as they passed slowly by,
George Geith listening to her alternately. grunting, snorting, gasping,
moaning, and holding her breath, found time, in the midst of his own anxieties,
to bestow sincere pity on the defunct Mr Gilling. 
"It is no wonder he died," thought the accountant; "the only marvel is, he was
not hanged;" and then his mind reverted to his own affairs, and George Geith
ransacked his brain to find some means of escape, to devise some way of
extricating himself from his difficulties. 
"Would Mark help him? could he, if he would? and if he could and would, how
might George apply to him after the way in which he had rejected help in the days gone by? 
"Did his promise to his mother (rose stanhope) bind him still? had she any
right to exact such a promise?" These were the thoughts that chased one another
through his mind. "If she were living, would she not release him? Was it fair
or expedient for one person to claim an unconditional promise from another, and
in this changeable life was it justifiable for any man to give that
unconditional promise and adhere to it? 
"Ought not every soul to be permitted to go free and unfettered through life?
ought he not to have been told the reason, when he was bound by the promise?
Probably the reasons had vanished long since; most likely his mother (rose
stanhope) would absolve him were she living. In all lives there comes a point
where each individual must free himself from control, and act irrespective of
the wishes and opinions of others. Had not that time come to him? 
"With the whole of his future happiness at stake, with Beryl's happiness, most
probably, likewise trembling in the balance, with his own health broken, with
the best working part of his life past, should he not be justified in deciding
he had kept his word long enough, in claiming, after all these weary years of
toil, temporary help, temporal salvation at the hands of his nearest of kin?"
All the night long, whilst the fire first blazed cheerfully, then fell
smouldering together, then died out, whilst the candles burnt lower and lower,
till, without a helping hand, they expired in the midst of a final
illumination, whilst Mrs Gilling slept the sleep of the righteous, George Geith
argued the question with himself.
He was reluctant to do wrong; but who may say that he was not placed in a
difficult dilemma as to what was right? 
For, although there may be a doubt as to the circumstances under which a dying
person may strive to exact a promise, there can be no doubt but that the living
are not, under any circumstances, justified in giving one; and if they be not
justified in giving one, are they right to keep it inviolate once it is given? 
Cannot we fancy the dead themselves mourning over their folly in taking the
part of the Omniscient, and saying in their finite wisdom, or their
short-sighted love, "Thou shalt not," or "Thou shalt," for all time, and, so
far as we can see, for all eternity also. 
Did he err greatly in deciding that it would be well for him to break his word
at last? that word which he had kept intact through sorrow, and temptation, and despair. 
God knows, it is not for us to judge. All (I the narrator) can tell is, how the
man whose life's story I have told, so far determined, ere he fell asleep. He
made up his mind to apply to Sir Mark for help. Toil, and disappointment, and
love had, for the time being, taken all pride and all obstinacy out of his
nature; and having formed this plan, which would, he thought, relieve him from
present difficulties, he fell, as Mrs Gilling phrased it, into a "beautiful slumber."
"He has slept all night like an infant," said that charming old lady, and she
really believed the truth of her own statement. "It would be worth your while,
girls," she added, addressing Mrs Bemmidge and Miss Gilling, "to take a peep at
him; I am sure I never saw a grown-up person sleeping so like a child before."
With becoming modesty Miss Gilling stole into the room on tiptoe after her
married sister (mrs bemmidge), to see the phenomenon Mrs Gilling had described. 
"Lor', how beautiful," said Gertrude, with uplifted hands, "I declare I never
thought Mr Geith handsome before;" and then Mr Bemmidge and mamma's queen (amy
bemmmidge) were likewise introduced into the room to view the sick man's slumbers. 
"Poor fellow!" muttered Andrew Bemmidge, as he stole from the chamber, "he
won't look so happy when he wakens. I wish my tongue had been cut out before I
ever mentioned Nortons to him;" and if Mr Bemmidge were a little extravagant in
his wish, he was perfectly sincere in his sorrow. Had he owned ten thousand
pounds, there is not the slightest doubt but that he would have thrust the
whole sum into George's hands in the excess of his needless remorse and self-reproach. 
Never a truer friend existed than Mr Bemmidge; and though he had a hundred
things to attend to of his own, he would not stir a step out of the house till
Mr Geith awoke, in case he should want him to attend to any business in the City. 
"I should like to write a note," said George, in answer to Mr Bemmidge's
inquiries, which were made whilst the accountant sat, propped up with pillows,
eating his breakfast; "and I wish you would get it sent up at once to Halkin
Street. You might tell Foss to take it; and if Sir Mark be not there, let him
inquire where he is, and then tell him to come back to me."
"Is this gentleman (mark geith) any relation of yours?" ventured Mr Bemmidge,
after George had written his note, and given it to him. "I see he is of the same name."
"He is my cousin," answered the accountant; and Mr Bemmidge went down-stairs to
convey this pleasing intelligence to the female portion of his household. 
"Oh! Lor', how strange!" exclaimed Miss Gilling; "I should not be surprised,
mar, if Sir Mark came to see Mr Geith at once. I shall go straight away home
and put on my blue silk, and I should advise you, Sarah, to have the dear
children (bemmidge children) nicely dressed. Oh, Andrew, how I wish I knew what
was in the note! I wonder if he says anything about mar (mrs gilling) sitting
up with him. I think it very likely, don't you?"
If Miss Gilling had read what George's note contained, she might have been
slightly disappointed to learn that he had found something to write about other
than her mamma (mrs gilling)'s polite attentions. 
"Dear Mark (it began),  Do you remember, years ago, offering me help  money
help I mean  and my refusing it? Well, I have been thrown at last, and am badly
crippled by the fall. Nortons' stoppage has ruined me. Can you assist me with
10,000, or a part of it, and oblige your cousin 
"George?" 
To which epistle Mr Foss brought back, in due course, the following reply scrawled in pencil:
"I wish I could help you, old fellow (george geith), and you should soon be off
the ground; but the fact is, I am so infernally hard run myself, that I have
not at this minute got 50 of ready money in the world. I shall come over to see
you as soon as I am dressed. I wish I could help you, on my honour I do.
 "Mark."
"Confound your wishes, and your honour too," exclaimed George Geith, as he made
a ball of the note, and flung it with all his force into the fire, to the great
amazement of Mr Foss, who had been wonderfully taken by the baronet's
free-and-easy manner, and by the way in which he had been introduced into that
gentleman's bed-room, to tell him all he knew about George's misfortune.
"And he would insist on my having lunch, spite of everything I could say," Mr
Foss subsequently informed the ladies; "and while I was eating it my lady came
down to hear what was the matter, too. Such a beauty, Gertrude! and to listen
to her, one might have thought Mr Geith was her brother. She cried till her
eyes were quite red, when I told her about his falling down in the street. "
"'Oh! what will his aunt (lady geith) say? Oh! what will his aunt say?' she
kept repeating.' We dare not tell her, for she would never forgive Mark,
never.' Then on the top of that she said she would start off by herself to Nice
and get the money her cousin wanted from Lady Geith; that is Sir Mark's mother,
you understand. I do not think she knew her own mind two minutes together, and
I am sure I could not make sense out of the tenth part of what she said. But
they were both very sorry, there could be no doubt about that."
"I wonder," added Mr Foss, impressively, "I wonder how the devil a cousin of
Sir Mark Geith, and a cousin so well liked, too, ever came to be an accountant in Fen Court?"
"Do not swear, 'Enery," said Mrs Gilling. 
"You should hear Mr Geith, ma'am. I learnt it off him," was the answer.
Whereupon Mrs Bemmidge exclaimed, "Oh! fie," and Miss Gilling tittered. 
"And for that matter, too," went on Mr Foss, who had found the Halkin Street
wine of the strongest, "you should hear Sir Mark. I am sure if oaths could have
sent Norton's head off it would not be now on his shoulders."
"Is he coming here? are you sure he said he was coming here?" asked Miss
Gilling, walking to and from the window, in a flutter of anxious expectation. 
"Certain and positive. He made me write him down the address, and ring the bell
and order his horses (mark geith's horses); and then he said if that d--d groom
of his (kailes) was sharp he should be at Holloway before me; but you see he wasn't, after all."
"Wasn't, after all," repeated mamma's queen (amy bemmidge) with a lisp,
whereupon Mr Foss swung her round and round the room, and finally planted her
on the sofa in solitary state. 
"He is here," said Mrs Gilling, solemnly, as Mr Foss was remarking he must be
off again for the City, and a hush fell on the party while Sir Mark's knock
resounded through the house  "he is here;" and had the baronet's mind been more
at ease, he would have been amused at the trio of courtesies which greeted his
entrance into the room. 
"How do again?" he said, turning to Mr Foss, after duly acknowledging the
ladies' politeness. "You have been quicker than I expected; but one cannot ride
fast over the stones. Can I see my cousin? Is he awake?"
Mrs Bemmidge believed he was; Miss Gilling put her head on one shoulder, and
tried to look sentimental, whilst Mrs Gilling assumed her blandest smile, and
requested Mr Foss to "conduct Sir Mark to Mr Geith's apartment."
"Thank you," said the baronet, and he turned the handle and reclosed the door for himself. 
"George, what is it?" he asked, sitting down on the bed, and taking his cousin's hand in his.
"Only that I am ruined," was the reply, and George drew his hand away again. 
"You have a right to be angry with me," said the baronet. "You may reproach me
as much as you like, and I shall never cry, Hold. I ought not to have cut off
that entail  I admit it  but it has been as bad for me as for you. It has indeed."
"I can hardly see that," answered George, coldly, "for you have had your cake
and eaten it, while I have never even seen mine."
"You have not had my anxieties, though," returned Sir Mark. "What with seeing
the money flying uselessly; what with the dread of my mother (Lady Geith)
hearing about the entail; what with the thought of you, and the fear of losing
Snareham, my life has been a hell, George, a perfect hell."
 "You made it so for yourself, then," replied the accountant, "for never a man
started in life with fairer prospects, with greater chances of happiness, than
yourself; but this talk can do no good to either of us, Mark. Let us speak of
something else. How is your wife?"
"She is quite well, and so are my children  two daughters (mark geith's daughters)."
"No son?" The question was put with a certain interest. 
"None, and," added Sir Mark, hastily, "if you do not know it already, you are
now the next heir, for uncle Arthur is dead."
"I am the next heir to what?" asked George, with a sneer. "Do you mean to
beggary? for that, it seems, is about all which is now left to me."
"I swear to you," cried Sir Mark, "I will live economically for the future; I
will go abroad, where we can reduce our expenses at once. We will settle some
place near my mother (Lady Geith), and"
"Get her to leave her money to you, so that you may fling that also to the
dogs," interrupted the accountant, bitterly. "No, Mark, do not deceive
yourself; you will never retrench; so long as you have sixpence you will spend
half-a-crown. Snareham will never be worth that," said George, snapping his
fingers, "to any Geith again, and lying here a ruined man, you can scarcely
expect me to say, 'I forgive you for having taken my last chance of wealth or
position away for ever.'"
"I will make what reparation I can," said Sir Mark, meekly. "I will go to my
mother (Lady Geith), I will tell her all, I will ask her for money for you now,
I will entreat her to leave everything to you when she dies, I will sell
Snareham, and live on the surplus that remains after paying my debts, and if
that should not support us, I will work."
With some difficulty the accountant raised himself on his elbow, and surveyed
his cousin from head to foot. 
"You look like a man to work, I must say," he remarked, after this scrutiny;
"and, further," he added, with a weary sigh, as he lay down again, "I do not
know that, after my own experience, I should advise any one to work who can sit
idle. It is as profitable to play for nothing, as to work for nothing."
There was a silence for a minute after this, a silence which Sir Mark broke by
saying: "Tell me what I can do for you, George, in this matter, and there is my
hand, that, at any cost, at any sacrifice to myself, I will help you. Money I
have not; money I cannot raise; but my mother (Lady Geith) has plenty, and she
would give it to you in a moment. I will go to her, if you like; I will start
to-night, if you only say the word."
"Thank you, Mark, I think you would," said the other, touched in spite of
himself; "but by the time you returned from Nice it would be all up with me. It
is trust money that is gone, it is trust money I must replace at once. Had it
not been that the blow stunned me so confoundedly, I should not have applied to
you. As it is, there is another man (mr tettin) who can, I think, and will,
help me out of this hole. Once out of it, I will take good care never to get
into such a mess again."
"Will you not let me go to my mother (Lady Geith), then?" asked the baronet. 
"No," answered George Geith. "No," he repeated more firmly, after a moment's
deliberation; "I will not come between you and your mother (lady geith), Mark.
I have worked, and can work again; you have never worked, and could not do it
if you tried. But I'll tell you what," went on the accountant, when he had
paused and thought over what he was going to say, "you shall promise me to make
another effort to keep Snareham. Do not let the Jews have it, even though it be
encumbered. Come to me when I have my wits about me again, and let us see if
the old place cannot be cleared yet. For the sake of your wife, for the sake of
your children (mark geith's daughters), Mark, make one effort more."
And George Geith put out his hand, that brave right hand which had worked so
long, and so well, and laid it on his cousin's as he spoke. 
It took a good deal to move the baronet's composure, but his voice shook as he
answered: "I will do what you ask me, George. Yes, I will come and show you
all, but I am afraid it is too late  too late."

CHAPTER 37. RESIGNED. 

Whilst talking to his cousin, it had occurred to George, that possibly Mr
Tettin might be both able and willing to render him the assistance he required,
and he accordingly asked the baronet to see that gentleman, and ask him to visit Ivy Cottage. 
"As I dare say you have not much to do, Mark, you might offer to drive him
over," suggested the accountant. "He would come all the quicker, and, most
probably, all the more readily too."
"I rode here," was the reply, "but I will call with him on my way back, and
send Kailes on for the carriage. Good-bye, old fellow, au revoir."
And with this Sir Mark left the room, and mounted his horse, and rode down the
Holloway Road and up the Camden Road at a hand gallop. Up the hill past the
prison, down the hill near the railway bridge, Sir Mark never slackened his pace. 
It was not until he got on the stones that he pulled his steed (mark geith's
horse) up to a walk, and he would not have walked then, but that, like all good
riders, he was careful of his horses, and solicitous for the safety of their knees. 
If he was fast, however, Mr Tettin was slow; he had clients. to see, he had
papers to make up, he had letters to write, and it was therefore quite dark
before Sir Mark's carriage stopped at Mr Bemmidge's garden gate. 
"I will not get out," remarked the baronet. "No doubt my cousin (george geith)
will like best to see you alone," which was the more considerate of Sir Mark,
as he shrewdly conjectured there was some secret lying between the accountant
and the solicitor, a secret he would dearly have loved to know.
 That there had once been such a secret, the reader is already aware; but on
the present occasion, neither Mr Tettin nor Mr Geith made any allusion to it. 
George confined himself to a bare statement of his affairs, of his liabilities
and his resources. Mr Tettin confined himself to listening, so that the
conversation could not have proved particularly amusing or instructive to a
third person, had a third person been present. 
"Of course it is ruin anyhow you take it," said the accountant, when he had
finished his explanation; "but there are various ways of being ruined, and for
my part, I prefer going back to the beginning and commencing de nouveau, rather
than having a meeting of creditors, or asking favours from any one. If I can
but gam time to realize without a loss, I can pay twenty shillings, and perhaps
have something left beside; but if I cannot get time, I must go through the
court. Even had I been able to get about, I could not gather ten thousand
pounds together at an hour's notice, and as I am, I can do nothing. Perhaps I
may be up to-morrow, and in the City the next day; but even so "
"Don't attempt it," Mr Tettin replied, laying his hand on the sick man's
shoulder. "Don't attempt it; lie still and leave all to me; I'll see you
through it, my boy, never fear."
And he departed, leaving George in a state of bewilderment, partly at the
deliverance which had been wrought for him, and greatly at Mr Tettin's
extremely easy style of address; but he need not have been surprised at the
lawyer's solemnity being disturbed for once. Never had Mr Tettin seen a man
fight before like the accountant; never had he beheld such an unequal contest
waged successfully as George Geith had carried on for years; never had he been
so impressed with the energy and force of will of any human being as by the
indomitable perseverance and power of endurance possessed by this man, who was
now lying crushed, and maimed, and helpless; beggared, through no fault or imprudence of his own. 
Next day Sir Mark rode over to urge his cousin to come at once to Halkin
Street. "Cissy will be enchanted," said the good-natured baronet. "I do not
know anything we should both like better than having the nursing of you. And
though I do not mean to say but that your friends here seem devilishly good
kind of people and careful of you, and all that, still they are not exactly 
you know what I mean, George, don't you?"
"They do well enough for me, if that is what you mean," answered George, with
his old defiant independence of manner. "They have been very good to me, and I
am very grateful to them for their kindness."
"Of course you are, and so you ought to be; and I am very grateful for their
care of you too. I should like to be able to do something for them in return.
Is not the husband a wine merchant? shall I send him an order for half a dozen butts?"
"Do not, Mark; do not, for Heaven's sake!" said his cousin, earnestly; "the man
is poor, and it would ruin him to be kept out of his money as long you would keep him out of it."
"Well thought of, George," answered the baronet, laughing even whilst he winced. 
"Shall I ask my mother (Lady Geith) to order it, then? she would do it if I
said he had been kind to you."
"She would have to know how he had been kind," remarked George, "and that would
involve telling her about Nortons', which misfortune I think we had best make no mention of."
"What a long-headed fellow you are," said the baronet; "but all this is beside
the question. Will you come and stay with us? Will you let me take you back to
Halkin Street tomorrow?"
"When I am able to go to Halkin Street, I shall be able to go to Fen Court,"
answered the accountant, "and I had rather get back to my work, thank you,
Mark, than think about paying visits."
"There is no little tendresse keeping you here, George, is there?" asked his
cousin; "that young lady down-stairs (miss gilling) seems very much interested
in your recovery, and so forth."
"That young lady down-stairs (miss gilling) is, so far as I know, going to
marry my clerk (mr foss)," George replied; "as for me, I shall never marry
anybody now, Mark. Nortons' stoppage has settled "
"Should you have married, but for that" said Sir Mark compassionately, as his
cousin paused and hesitated. 
"I hoped I should," was the answer, "but that hope is dead for ever now;" and
George, who could have borne all other questions, save this, philosophically,
broke down at the thought of Beryl, and turned aside to hide how the topic affected him. 
"George," said the baronet, pausing after he had walked two or three times up
and down the room. "George, nothing shall prevent my going to Nice and laying
the state of your affairs before my mother (Lady Geith). Every hope of your
life shall not be sacrificed to me. If money can give you happiness, money you shall have."
"No, Mark, not at that price; I could not take such a sum of money as a gift. I
would not now be hampered by it as a loan. As for her (beryl)-" George
proceeded with a tremor in his voice, "she never knew how I loved her, and she
never shall; and in the years to come, when she is married to some rich man,
and is a happy wife, and has her children all about her, she will never imagine
how a poor accountant in the City was once nearly breaking his heart for her sake."
"But George, dear George," and Sir Mark grew quite pathetic in his sympathy. 
"I tell you, it is of no use arguing with me," said his cousin, almost
fiercely. "I was mad ever to think of it, mad to dream of dragging her down to
my level. I was made to work, and I will think and dream no more."
And with that the accountant closed the conversation and laid by his love. In
the most secret chamber of his heart he stored it away; in the most remote
corner of his existence, separate and apart from all the cares and sorrows of
his life, he placed the memory of Beryl Molozane. 
As we lay a rose in our drawer, and find that every paper it contains is
impregnated with the odour, so this love, dead and hopeless though it might be,
seemed to fill George Geith's existence with something it had always lacked before. 
For her dear sake it was useless for him ever again to toil, to save, to
speculate, to increase, but the love he bore her softened and beautified his
nature, made him gentler towards his fellows, kinder, more tolerant, better.
Sanctified by a great sorrow, subdued by the great defeat he had met with,
strengthened by the conquest he had achieved over himself, by the victory he
had gained, George Geith rose up after his sickness a better man, and went
forth once again to his labour and his toil, without a murmur. 
CHAPTER 38. THE LAST MOLOZANE. 

That some misfortune had happened to the accountant, that he had passed through
a great trial, through a fierce fire, any one might have guessed by looking in his face. 
The moment he saw him, Mr Molozane, ill as he was himself, guessed that it was
not sickness alone which had kept his friend away. 
"Mr Bemmidge told me you were very unwell," he said, "but I fear you have been
more than unwell, that you have had some heavy trouble."
"You are right," answered George, who had requested Mr Bemmidge not to mention
his loss to Mr Molozane; "I have had a heavy trouble since I was here last; but
it is over now; the worst is past."
That was all he said upon the subject then, but subsequently, when Mr Molozane,
knowing for certain that it was the hand of death he felt laid upon him, talked
about the child (beryl) he was leaving, and his misery thinking of her
loneliness, George summoned up courage, and told him all. How he had loved the
girl; how he had hoped to win her; how he had laboured for her sake; how he had
meant to ask her father's permission to wed her; and how, just at the last
moment, the cup was dashed from his lips. All this the one man told the other,
as they sat together in the sunlight of the early spring. 
"There is only one comfort in it to me," said George, who read in his friend's
face that he would have given Beryl into his charge thankfully, "that it
happened before I had spoken to her, before anything had been said which might
have cast a shadow on her after-life. If ever she cared for me, she will forget
me ere long  and I  Mr Molozane, I thank God for giving me the burden to carry, and sparing her."
Out of the depths of his heart he could say that truthfully. He had loved so
well, that his love was unselfish. 
"You are the only man I ever met," Mr Molozane answered, slowly, "that I should
have liked for a son-in-law, with whom I should have felt happy to trust my
child (beryl). Had I money to leave, I would give both it and her to you
without a fear; but as neither of you have a fortune, it is perhaps, as you
say, better to leave her choice unfettered, her fancy free; if," added Mr
Molozane, "it still be free. If, however, hereafter, "he proceeded more slowly,
"if, in the course of God's providence, you and she ever should become man and
wife, remember it is what I longed for before I died more than for any other
earthly blessing. And if you never marry, be a friend to her when she wants a
friend; and should she ever apply to you in any trouble or perplexity, will you
stand to her, and help her as I should myself?"
Would he? Would George Geith not have worked for her, slaved for her, died for
her? Would he not have taken her then, and run all risks of poverty, but for
the dread that in so taking her he might be standing between her and a happier
and more prosperous lot? 
During Mr Molozane's long sickness, all through those weeks of terrible
suspense, and still more terrible certainty, the accountant longed, with a
longing such as he had never before experienced, to tell his love to the girl,
and ask leave to stand by her in the trial he saw approaching. 
But as that might not be, as he thought they might never be more to one another
than they were then, he held his peace, and Beryl passed through such suffering
as would have made him speak in spite of himself, had he known it, all alone. 
Now, for the first time in her life, Beryl felt the want of money, daily and hourly.
Mr Molozane's was an expensive disease; expensive in the medical attendance it
required, in the physical comforts it demanded, in the nourishment it
necessitated. All the oil that could be given was needed to keep the flickering
flame alight from day to day. With less tender nursing with less loving care,
the man had been dead within a month,' but as it was, Beryl's devotion kept him
alive even beyond the time the great West-end doctor had pronounced it possible for him to survive.
With nothing coming in, with money eternally going out, Beryl's little store,
which had been already broken in upon to defray the expense attendant on
Louisa's illness, was soon exhausted. Still hopeful of her father (mr
molozane)'s recovery, still reluctant to ask for help, or to beg assistance
from any one, the girl gradually parted with every trinket, with every valuable
she possessed. Even Louisa's earnings, those two golden sovereigns, those six
shabby-looking shillings, which the dead girl had tossed over and over so
lovingly on her death-bed, that money which Beryl had laid by like some
hallowed treasure amongst the rest of her sister's little possessions, even
that went before Beryl applied to Mrs Richard Elsenham for assistance. 
"Money, my dear?" said that unselfish lady, when her visitor told her errand,
and reluctantly entreated help. "Had you not better go to grandmamma? She has
plenty, and I have not."
"I would rather not go to grandmamma," Beryl answered, "and remembering your
great generosity to me before, Tilly, I should not have come to you now if I
could have avoided it; but papa (mr molozane) cannot live without things, which
I have not the means of getting for him. You may think I have been extravagant,
darling," she said, looking up from the footstool which she occupied, into her
sister's face; "but I have not; indeed, indeed I have not. There was the
furnishing, and then the living, until papa got that situation. Then Louey's
illness, and  the expenses of her funeral," Beryl added, after a pause. "And
now, Tilly, papa has been three months ill, and I have had to pay doctors'
fees, and to get wine and jellies, and beef tea, and a hundred things; and I
have not had a half-penny of help. Granny has never sent me a farthing."
"She must now, then," said Mrs Richard Elsenham, "for I cannot assist you."
"But you did once assist me, Tilly. I will never ask you again, and I am not
asking you for myself now, but for papa." And Beryl laid her hand deprecatingly
on her sister's arm, for she did not like the expression which came over that
lady's face as she spoke. 
"Get up, Beryl," said Mrs Richard Elsenham, irritably, "and sit on a chair like other people."
After which pleasant speech the beauty (Matilda Molozane) began beating the
carpet impatiently with her little foot. 
"I cannot help you," she went on, seeing Beryl waited for an answer. "I have
not a sovereign in the world of my own."
"But, my dear Tilly," expostulated Beryl, "you have a very handsome settlement."
"In my position," answered her sister, "my handsome settlement, as you call it,
hardly suffices to dress me suitably."
"And then, Granny is always making you presents," persisted Beryl. 
"She does not make me presents now," returned young Mrs Elsenham, shortly, "nor Richard either."
"Your husband has a very fine income," ventured Beryl. 
"You had better go and ask him for some of it, then," was the reply. "He may,
perhaps, give it to you; but it would be useless my asking him."
"I shall certainly not ask Dick Elsenham to bestow alms on the Molozanes,
though he is married to one of them," said Beryl, her face red with anger and
disappointment, and she rose in a passion, and had reached the door, when some
softer feeling came over her, and she paused and said: "Good-bye, Tilly. Though
you have refused to help papa now, I will try not to forget you assisted us
before, when we wanted assistance almost as badly. It was very generous of you,
and one cannot expect people to go on giving for ever."
"Beryl, come back!" cried her sister, impulsively. "Beryl, I have something to
tell you. Come back! It was not from me," she went on, "you got that money. I
have owed as much, but I have never owned as much in my life. Mr Werne left it
with me for you. He is dead now, poor man, and it is better for you to know the truth."
"And you took the credit?"
"What could I do? He knew you would not have had it from him, and it was better
for all of you for you to take it. If you had married him, Beryl, papa (mr
molozane) would never have needed to be a clerk in the City, and poor Louey
might have been alive now. You made a terrible mistake there; you did, indeed."
"And it is fitting you should reproach me with it," retorted Beryl; "you, who
have done so well for yourself, and who now will not hold out a finger to help
your father (mr molozane) on his death-bed, for it is his death-bed. You may
believe it or not, just as you like; but it is the truth, and it is your duty
to do what you can for him. Remembering all he has done for you, it ought to be
your pleasure, too, I think."
She had shot home this time. At Beryl's words, at the sharp stinging sentence,
which her misery had wrung from her, Matilda's thoughts flew back to a time
when she was not altogether selfish, to the old familiar scenes, to the
half-forgotten words, to the better, happier life, she had led in the days that
were now past and gone for ever. 
"He is not dying," she said, and the hot tears came into her eyes, and Mrs
Richard Elsenham for once forgot herself, as she spoke: "If it were true, you
could not talk about it so quietly, Beryl."
"If you had passed through as much trouble as I have the last six months,"
answered the girl, "perhaps you could be quiet too;" and she sat down on the
nearest couch, and resting her tired head on her hand, waited till her sister's
sorrow should have expended itself. 
"I have no money," said Mrs Richard Elsenham, at last removing her
handkerchief, and turning her face swollen with weeping towards Beryl, "but I
have jewels. Take them, and get all he requires, and I will come and see him
oftener. I will come and stay with you, if you will let me; I did not know he
was so ill. Oh! Beryl, why did you not tell me before?"
"I was hoping against hope, Tilly," was the reply, "and I should not have told
you now, only that you seemed so cold and hard, I could not help it. Come as
often as you can; come and stay if you like, but I will not take your trinkets,
thank you. You might want them for the first ball you were invited to, and wish
you had them back again."
It was not a generous speech, but to save her life Beryl could not have kept
silence. Next minute she was sorry for it, and went over and begged her sister
(matilda)'s pardon, persisting, nevertheless, in her determination not to take
the jewels, but rather to go to her grandmother (maria elsenham), and get help from her. 
"I think Granny will not refuse me," said Beryl, meditatively; "she owes me
some gratitude for that ride to Wattisbridge, though it was useless, and I have
never asked her for anything before; besides, bad as she is, I cannot fancy she
would like her daughter's husband (mr molozane) to want for absolute
necessities in his last illness."
"Tell her she shall have (Guess the dog)," remarked Mrs Richard Elsenham, "that
will make her pleasant at once."
If her grandmother had asked for her right hand, Beryl would have given it, and
when weighed in the scales with her father's comfort, (Guess the dog) seemed a
small sacrifice for the girl to make. 
Nevertheless, Beryl did feel it a sacrifice, and debated within herself as she
crossed Kensington Gardens, whether begging in the streets would not, after
all, be a more independent proceeding than asking help from her relations 
whether it would not be placing him less under an obligation to write to some
of her father's old friends, than thus to go from sister to grandmother,
praying for that which was nothing more than his right. 
Had Mr Werne been living, she would have gone to him, and on that lovely May
day Beryl sighed bitter sighs of repentance because she had refused to marry
the man who could have helped them all. "I thought of myself before either papa
(mr molozane) or Louey," was the idea uppermost in the poor child's mind. "If I
had to do it again I would marry him a hundred times over."
But Beryl had not to do it again  had no other chance of help than the hope
that her grandmother would be generous, that she would give her enough to buy "all papa wanted."
To be sure there was the furniture, which she had not thought of before; she
might sell the greatest portion of it. Could she not ask Mr Geith to find
someone who would buy it? But no; somehow Beryl could not ask Mr Geith about
anything now. It would have seemed to her easier to stop the first passer-by
and request him to advance what she required, than to take that once-familiar
friend into her confidence again. 
For something had come to him which she could not understand, and something had
also come to her which she did not understand either, and did not want to think
about; besides, she did not want to hasten by an hour that terrible breaking up
she saw dimly looming in the future. 
There was no choice, therefore, but applying to her grandmother, who received
Beryl graciously; who gave her twenty pounds without a murmur; who called her a
good girl, and was generously pleased to accept (Guess the dog). 
"I am afraid I shall never be able to repay this, grandmamma," said Beryl,
taking the notes hesitatingly, really thinking that Mrs Elsenham had given them
to her under some delusion. "I have made Richard and his wife (matilda)
presents worth five times that amount, oftener than I could tell you, and they
have scarcely had the grace to say thank you," replied her grandmother; "keep
it, Beryl; you are a good girl, though you may have been a foolish one." And
Mrs Elsenham patted her on the back, and drove her home to Stock Orchard
Crescent, whence the old lady did not forget to take (Guess the dog) to his new quarters. 
Twenty pounds! It was not a large amount, and yet it proved more than enough to
supply all Mr Molozane's earthly needs. Before half of it was gone, Ambrose
Alfred Molozane, Esq., formerly of Molozane Park, Herts, had departed to that
land where, happily, bank notes are useless, and Beryl was lest in a world
where they are indispensable, penniless and alone. 
"Have you any place to go to? What do you intend doing? Will you come and stay
with us?" were the questions Matilda put to Beryl, who, prostrated and
tearless, lay on a sofa, thinking stupidly of her bereavement and her isolation. 
"I do not know what I shall do," answered Beryl; "but I shall not go to stay at
your house, thank you, Tilly," and then, in her utter loneliness and
helplessness, she buried her face in the sofa pillow, thinking, "If I cannot
die, what shall I do? where can I go?"
"Where could she go?" George Geith put that very same question to himself as he
sat in Fen Court on the evening of Mr Molozane's funeral. 
Poor as he was, he felt half inclined even then to go and tell her all his
love; all his sorrow; all his longing to protect her; and it is probable he
might, in the house whence the dead had so lately been carried, have asked her
to be his wife, but that Beryl, without the slightest symptom of
dissatisfaction at the arrangement, stated she was going to reside with her
grandmother (maria elsenham). 
"I thought, perhaps," observed George, "you might have liked to live with your sister."
"I could not live in the same house with her husband," answered Beryl; and the
pair shook hands in farewell. 
"Miss (Beryl)," said George, and his voice shook for a moment, and he held
Beryl's thin fingers so tightly in his grasp that the pressure hurt her; "you
have wealthy relations, and will make friends wherever you go; still, the time
may come when even a poor man like what I am could serve you. If it should, do
not forget me. To the last hour of my life I shall never forget you."
She tried to speak, she tried to thank him, but there was something stronger
than her own will tearing at her heart and suffocating her. 
She knew as well that he had loved her, that he did love her, as though he had
told her so, over, and over, and over. And she knew, moreover, that she loved
him, and yet that for some sufficient reason he would never ask her to marry
him; that, being all the world to one another, they yet were not to be man and wife. 
A poor reason it would have seemed to her had she guessed it; but still,
knowing her rich grandmother (maria elsenham) was about to take her, it was
sufficient and more than sufficient to keep George Geith from speaking out his thoughts. 
She would marry well in the happy days that he hoped were yet in store for her.
He would not stand between her and the light. Thus thinking, the accountant
left Stock Orchard Crescent, and walked sorrowfully back to the City to resume
that life of incessant hard work and utter loneliness which was his portion
before he ever beheld the man whose mortal remains he had seen that day borne
along the Hertfordshire lanes, through the woods, and beside the meadows, to be
laid at last in the narrow house appointed for all living.

CHAPTER 39. SUNSHINE.
 	
It was summer once again, and George Geith sat in his office, thinking, not
writing. He had changed the position of his desk, which now stood with its end
instead of its back between the windows, and consequently as the accountant
bent listlessly over his papers, the sunbeams streamed upon his head, and the
breeze which found ingress through the open casement, and blew the discoloured
blind aside, stirred his hair gently. 
Fifteen months had passed since Nortons' failure  fifteen months of such toil,
such anxiety, and such loneliness as had plentifully besprinkled his hair with
grey, and drawn lines across his forehead. 
How he had worked in the time, how he had battled, and battled successfully,
against both his ill fortune and his sorrow, was a story he could not have told
to anyone, but somehow he had worked and he had battled, and if he were poor he
was at any rate clear of debt. 
Nortons' estate had not paid a very high dividend, only five farthings in the
pound, but George Geith felt very thankful even for that when it came; when in
lieu of his ten thousand five hundred and fifty pounds, he pocketed the precise
sum of sixty-three pounds one shilling and five-pence half-penny. 
Whether he derived an equal amount of satisfaction from the knowledge that Mr
Norton and Mrs Norton, and all the little Nortons, to say nothing of a fry of
other people, who were related to the Nortons either by blood or matrimony, had
contrived by aid of marriage settlements and various such like expedients to
escape the common ruin, may be greatly doubted. 
Mr Norton retired to his "wife's property" in Devonshire, where he had ample
time for indulgence in his favourite hobby, yachting. 
Years afterwards, when the accountant occupied a different position, both in
the City and at the West-end, the ex-banker, meeting him at Ilfracombe, was
kind enough to forget about the past, and ask him to dine with him, an
invitation which tried George Geith's courtesy and his temper to the utmost;
but those days in which he was thought good enough to be requested to dine at
the table of the man who had robbed him, were yet far distant when he sat, as 
(I the narrator)  have said, thinking in Fen Court. 
Thinking not pleasantly over a proposition which his clerk, Mr Foss, had made
to him the day previously, and which he, Mr Geith, had declined that same
morning. Mr Foss wanted to be taken into partnership, wanted to place himself
and a thousand pounds left to him a month before by his uncle (mr foss's
uncle), on an equality with his present employer. 
Of course, the thing was not to be thought of. To take a partner at all would,
to a man like George Geith, under the most favourable circumstances, have been
a most disagreeable proceeding; but to promote his own clerk, to be indebted to
his paltry thousand pounds for money to carry on business! Gall and wormwood
would have been sweet to George Geith in comparison to that. 
There is no aristocrat like a democrat. Having felt democratical towards those
above him, it was only natural that the accountant should likewise feel it only
right to keep those below himself in their proper station. Further than this,
there were other reasons which caused Mr Foss's proposition to-be peculiarly
distasteful to Mr Geith. 
In the first place, the young man had been with him a long time, knew his ways,
was tolerably well acquainted with the business, and could be thoroughly
depended on for his time; therefore it was inconvenient for him to part with him.
Secondly, he was too well acquainted with Mr Geith's customers to render the
idea of his starting in business for himself palatable. Thirdly, the accountant
knew that by refusing to take him into partnership, he had made enemies for
life of all the female Bemmidges and Gillings (mrs bemmidge) (miss gilling) (mrs gilling). 
He had behaved wickedly enough in their eyes by his insensibility towards the
charms of the fair Gertrude, but to refuse to advance the interest of that
lady's future husband (mr foss) was more wicked still. 
Mrs Gilling herself had come to his office not an hour before to urge him to
reconsider his decision. 
George shrewdly suspected she had been lying in wait somewhere in the
neighbourhood till that decision should be communicated to Mr Foss. 
Solemnly, sitting opposite to him in his wooden arm-chair, crying and
perspiring freely, Mrs Gilling had assured him that "'Enery loved him like a
brother, and respected him as a father. Take him into partnership, Mr Geith, do."
"Mrs Gilling," replied Mr Geith, "I do not want a partner."
"But it will be better for you to have one," said the lady; "better for your
'ealth and 'appiness and your business."
"Of that you must allow me to judge," was the answer. 
"Why, Mr Geith, everybody that knows you knows Nortons' failure shook you
considerable. You have never looked the same since, and I am sure if you had
been my own son, I could not have felt more cut up than I did, to see you lying
like a dead man in Sarah's spare bed-room."
What could the accountant do after this, but express his eternal obligations to
Mrs Gilling, for her motherly sympathy and unremitting attention. 
He was extremely grateful for the kindness that had been shown him by Mr
Bemmidge and all his family. He assured Mrs Gilling he did not, and could not, forget.
"Well then, if that is the way of it why can't we all be comfortable and
friendly together? What with 'Enery's money and your connection, if you worked
together you might get on, if it pleased the Lord, first-rate; whereas, if you
do not, you will be like an 'ouse'old divided against itself, as the saying
is," added Mrs Gilling, perfectly unconscious that she was quoting Scripture,
and Scripture incorrectly. 
"To speak plainly, you mean, I suppose, that if I do not take him into
partnership, Mr Foss will, on the knowledge he has gained in my employment,
start on his own account, and take such of my customers (george's clients) with
him as he can manage to secure."
"'Enery would do nothing dishonourable, I can assure you, Mr Geith," said Mrs
Gilling with dignity. 
"Of course not; but he cannot prevent people following him, if such be their fancy."
"Well, you know," said Mrs Gilling, who was certainly no match in cleverness
for the accountant, "some might like 'Enery better nor you."
"It would be only reasonable to suppose so," observed George Geith. 
"And whatever friends Andrew Bemmidge has sent to you, would naturally follow
'Enery, if he commenced for himself."
"That, also, is a reasonable supposition," agreed the ac accountant. 
"So that putting two and two together, 'Arry's leaving you can't do you any
good, and may do you harm," finished Mrs Gilling; "and if you would take the
advice of an old woman who has both your interests at heart, you would not part
now, nor divide a business that ain't over and above large as it is."
"You must have been sorry to hear from Mr Foss how much my business has lately
decreased," remarked Mr Geith. 
"Bless you, 'Enery says as how that's nothing. With a little money and another
clerk, he thinks it could all be brought back in no time. Mr Geith, you will be
advised; you won't let a useful young man like that, who has your interest at
heart, slip through your fingers?"
"You are really very kind and considerate," answered George. "I will think over
what you have said."
"And don't decide in a hurry, Mr Geith, unless you decide to say 'yes,'" were
Mrs Gilling's last words as the accountant opened the door for her, and watched
her progress down-stairs. 
When she had disappeared, Mr Geith called in his clerk, and repeated what he
had said to him in the morning, with the addendum, that he should like Mr Foss
to leave his employment at once. 
"It is not," he added, "because you are going to start in business for
yourself, it is not because you may take a few of my clients (george's clients)
with you, that I say this; but it does not suit my purpose, Mr Foss, to have a
person here who canvasses my business difficulties amongst his friends."
"I am very sorry," said the young man, turning first red and then pale, "I did
not mean to do any harm. I did not think talking the matter over at Holloway
could injure you in any way."
"Then, before you commence on your own account, you had better learn that, in
business, great is the gift of silence. When you have been an accountant for a
twelvemonth, you will not like any move of your game to be discussed by a
parcel of chattering women (mrs bemmidge) (miss gilling) (mrs gilling)."
"You will let me stay till you have got somebody else in my place?" pleaded Mr
Foss. "I should not like to leave you in a corner." But Mr Geith was firm. 
"I do not intend to have another clerk at all at present," he answered; "and
sending you away now will not only prevent your talking about my affairs for
the future, but also, perhaps, induce you hereafter to hold your tongue about
your own. There is your month's salary in lieu of notice. And now good bye; I
wish you every success in your new undertaking."
Decidedly Mr Geith had the best of it. Mr Foss felt this, when after having
refused to take his salary, an idea which George pooh-poohed as absurd, he left
the office with a cheque in his pocket, and the kind wishes of his late
employer ringing in his ears. 
Spite of his thousand pounds and Andrew Bemmidge's connection, Henry Foss began
to be very doubtful indeed of the wisdom of the step he had taken, and wished
from the bottom of his heart that his mother-in-law elect had kept her fingers out of his pie. 
"Indeed, it will be a lesson to me," he thought, as he walked a purposeless,
wretched walk down Fenchurch Street to Aldgate, and thence through the blazing
sun up Commercial Street and round by Norton Folgate into Shoreditch. "I won't
open my lips about business matters again: I won't even tell one of them I have
been discharged, and I will go back and ask Mr Geith not to tell (Mr Bemmidge) either."
"Very well," said Mr Geith, when Mr Foss preferred this petition; "but I think
you had better make a confidant of him. He is here two or three times a week,
and would scarcely believe you were 'out' always."
"I do not know what to do," remarked Mr Foss, despairingly.
"I will tell you what to do," answered the accountant; "go and look out an
office at once; have your name painted on the door-post as soon as may be, and
get to work without delay. We part without any unpleasant feelings on either
side, I trust, and if I can do you a good turn, or send you a customer, I will."
"I should like to stay with you, if you would let me," ventured Mr Foss. 
"Thank you; but I find my business will not afford a clerk, and I decidedly decline a partner."
After this, Mr Foss went out again, and George Geith was left alone. 
Sitting there, (I the narrator)  think he felt like a man who from the summit
of 'some lonely rock watches vessel after vessel disappearing from sight, till
the last sail dips below the horizon. Everything had left him now, save his
health, his business, and his energy. Would they depart likewise? if they did,
what was to become of him? 
Thinking of this; thinking of the time when the tale of his life had been so
rich in promise, in hope, and in happiness, the man felt his courage failing
him, and was about to recommence his work, and so banish painful recollections,
when a light tap came to the door a light, timid tap  the tap of a person who
had paused and hesitated before knocking at all. 
"Come in," said George, but no one availed himself of the permission. Fancying
he must have been mistaken, the accountant resumed his writing, when all at
once something like a heavy hand was laid on the panel, something which made
the hinges give, and the lock rattle.
"What the devil can it be? Why can't the idiot come in?" he muttered, rising,
nevertheless, and turning the handle. 
As he did so, (Royal the dog) gravely walked past him into the office; and,
standing on the threshold, George beheld Beryl Molozane. 
How  seeing her so unexpectedly  he ever refrained from taking her in his arms
and holding her to his heart; how he retained sufficient presence of mind to
greet her quietly, and place a chair for her, and talk to her like a rational
being, George Geith never knew; but somehow he did manage to keep his senses,
and ask her how she was, and whence she had come. 
"I am quite well again, now, thank you," Beryl answered; "and I have come from
Bayswater, all that long way, Mr Geith, to beg you to do me a favour. Do you
remember what you said to me the last time I saw you to speak to? You told me
if ever you could serve me you would, and so I have come to you to ask you to serve me now."
He could not answer her in many words, he dared not trust himself to say much,
so he only told her that if she would show him how, he would do whatever she required. 
"I should not have come had I not been sure of that," she answered, laying her
hand on (Royal the dog)'s head as she spoke. "You must think it strange seeing
me here at all," she went on, after a moment's pause, "but I knew if I wrote
grandmamma (maria elsenham) would most likely intercept your reply."
"I called once to see you," said George, more perhaps by way of saying
something than for any other reason, "but you were not at home."
"No; and Granny sent you a letter telling you to keep away; Matilda told me so.
I might have thought you had quite forgotten there ever were such people as
papa, and Louey, and I, but for hearing that."
"I was not likely to forget the happiest part of my life," he said earnestly. 
"I saw you once in Oxford Street," she ran on, still caressing (Royal the dog)
as she spoke, "and I tried so hard to get you to look at me, but you would not.
I was in the carriage with grand-mamma (maria elsenham), or I should have gone
after you. I do not think any prisoner had ever less freedom than I have had
since I saw you. I have borne it till I can bear it no longer, and now I am
going to try and do something for myself, if you will help me."
"How can I help you?" he inquired. 
"In the first place I want you to find a kind master for (Royal the dog), and
in the next, I wish you would put an advertisement in The Times for me. If I
could get a situation of any kind  as companion, as housekeeper, as nursery
governess, I should be so thankful, so delighted. I am not clever enough to be
a governess, but I can sew, and I could teach little children and take care of
their clothes. I would do anything, Mr Geith, to get away from Bayswater; you
cannot think how wretched I have been."
And she stooped over the dog, who turned his wise eyes first upon her, and then
questioningly on George Geith. 
"She won't let me keep (Royal the dog)," said Beryl, her sobs breaking out at
last; "she ordered him to be shot, because he would not, and could not be made,
shake hands with everybody she wanted; and he would have been dead by this
time, only that I stole out while she thought I was dressing to go with her to
the park, and untied him, and got a cab and brought him here to you. I could
not have lived if they had killed him," she proceeded, passionately, "for I
like him better than any relative I have now on earth. Don't I, (Royal the
dog),  don't you know I do?"
Whereupon the dog, as if he had understood what she said, rose up majestically,
and laid his great head in her lap. 
What a lonely little soul it was, with nothing but a black retriever to love!
What a desolate little girl she looked to George Geith, sitting there with both
arms round (Royal the dog)'s neck, hugging him. 
"It breaks my heart to part with him," she said, looking at her auditor
(george), and stroking first one of the dog's great paws and then the other as
she spoke. "I cannot bear to think of his getting as fond of other people as he
is now of me. And yet still I could not wish him not to get fond. Royal, will
you ever like anybody so well as you have liked me; won't you be always wishing
for the old days to come back again?"
In answer to which speech (Royal the dog) lifted his disengaged paw and laid it
triumphantly on Beryl's shoulder. 
"You must think me very foolish. Mr Geith," she raid, pushing the dog gently
away, and resuming the quiet self-possession she had brought into the office
with her  a self-possession unknown to the Beryl he remembered so well. "But,
indeed, parting with (Royal the dog) seems to me like parting with the last
home thing belonging to me. What can I do, though? "she added sorrowfully. "You
will find a good home for him. I think he would like it in the country, and
where there are children, best. If I knew he was not fretting, if I heard about
him sometimes, I think I could be happy."
"I should have imagined your sister (matilda) would have taken him," said
George. "Remember, I shall be only too glad to find him a kind master; and am
only suggesting Mrs Richard Elsenham, because I thought you would, perhaps,
like such an arrangement best."
"My sister, Mr Geith," answered Beryl, "would take nothing grandmamma (maria
elsenham) discarded, unless to please grandmamma; she would not give me a
night's shelter  supposing I needed shelter  if she thought grandmamma would hear about it."
"So that there is now no person in the world who cares what you do or where you
go to?" observed George, almost in voluntarily. 
"I cannot say that exactly," was Beryl's reply. "Matilda would greatly like me
away from Bayswater, because she thinks  because, in fact " hesitated the girl 
"both Richard and she imagine I might hereafter stand in their way, while
grand-mamma (maria elsenham) would like me to remain at Bayswater as her slave,
her state prisoner  what you will."
"And you have quite decided on trying to earn your bread?" continued George.
"It is hard work, Miss (Beryl), I can tell you, I who have tried the experiment."
"I am not afraid," she answered; "if I earned my own bread I should at any rate
have a right to what I ate of it; if I worked hard I might perhaps get an hour
of peace and quiet ness now and then. Beyond all things, I should be free. I
should be allowed to labour without having to weigh every word, and look, and
thought, for fear of committing myself."
"And what do you intend to do about references?" he asked. 
"I shall refer to (Dr Mawley) and Mrs Mawley."
"And where do you wish the replies to be forwarded?"
"To you, if you please; and I want you to tell the people who answer, all about
me, and to decide for me, and to let me know when all is finally settled.
Matilda will take charge of one letter for me  only one, for she says she must
not be mixed up in the matter in any way."
"And would it be impossible for me to see you about any of the replies?"
"I am afraid so; grandmamma (maria elsenham) would not like it  like your
calling I mean. Indeed I know she would greatly object to my seeing any old
friend. And it would be of no use writing," she went on, "for I should never get the letters."
"You appear to be comfortably situated," he remarked. 
"I am not comfortably situated," she said, "and yet every hour in the day
Granny tells me I ought to be grateful to her, and do what she wants, to show I am grateful."
"And what does she want, if I am not impertinent?" asked George a little eagerly. 
"What I am not going to do," returned Beryl, rising hurriedly. "Will you take
charge of (Royal the dog) for me, Mr Geith; and will you insert the advertisement in The Times?"
"I will certainly take charge of Royal," he answered with a forced, anxious
smile, "and I will also insert the advertisement, but I should like to talk to
you a little more about your intention. I will not ask you to stay here any
longer; for though this is not my busy time, still people (george's clients)
are always coming in for one thing or another. May I walk back with you a
little way? should you have any objection to my accompanying you?"
"The cab is waiting for me," she hesitated. 
"We can dismiss it," he said, but still she stood irresolute; she asked what
time it was; she wondered how long it would take to drive to Bayswater; she
considered whether she could not contrive to see him at her sister (matilda)'s:
she swayed backward and forward like a pendulum; now saying she could, now
thinking she could not, till finally she plucked up courage sufficient to do
what he wished, observing at the same time that she knew the worst which could
befall. "Granny cannot do more than kill me, or tell me to leave the house."
"It would be rather a relief to you to be ordered to do the latter, perhaps?"
suggested George; but Beryl shook her head. She was in possession of a secret
which was sealed to him, that she had but a sovereign of her own in the world,
and nobody knew better than Beryl how short a time a sovereign would last if
she had to board and lodge herself out of it. 
"You had better give (Royal the dog) something to take care of," said Beryl;
"he will not stay behind unless he thinks he is well employed here." And so
they deluded the dog: Beryl by taking a little scarf off her neck and handing
it to George Geith, and George Geith by laying it down before the animal and
bidding him keep it safe. 
(I the narrator) am inclined to think (Royal the dog) knew they were cheating
him, that the whole trio understood the proceeding perfectly: for the dog
listed his head and, looked at Beryl so reproachfully when she was leaving the
back office where they had put him for better keeping, that she had to turn
back at the very door, and coax, and pat, and fondle, and, as George verily
believed, kiss him, ere she went. 
"I know you will not let him go to any place where they are not sure to treat
him kindly," she said, as she and George went down the stairs together. 
"If you allow me, I will keep him myself," answered George. 
"Will you? Will you really be troubled with him?" she exclaimed, eagerly. "Then
I shall be happy, quite happy; "and with something of her old elasticity, Beryl
skipped along the passage. "You will find him of use, too," she added; "he
would keep office for you like a Christian, or better, perhaps, than some
Christians. I'd like to see the man who would dare to lift one of your papers
while (Royal the dog) was alive. Mr Geith, I have not thanked you yet. I
believe the last thing I ever thought of in old times was thanking you, no
matter what you did for me."
Every moment she grew more and more like the Beryl, the well-remembered Beryl of the past. 
All the reserve, all the quietness she had acquired at Bayswater dropped off
her as she walked along Fenchurch Street, and up Lime Street, and along
Leadenhall Street, and down. Cornhill, with the truest friend she had ever met with in her life. 
"I could dance," she said, "if it would not shock the citizens. I could jump
for joy to be out by myself for half an hour. Oh! Mr Geith, if you but knew; if
you could but conceive what being with grandmamma is like. I think living in
one of the condemned cells in Newgate must be pleasant and cheerful in comparison to that."
CHAPTER 40. MARRIED. 

From Cornhill George Geith took Beryl Molozane past the back of the Royal
Exchange, across Threadneedle Street, down Bartholomew Lane, into Austin Friars.
Is there a quieter place in the City than Austin Friars, a more world-forsaken,
man-forgotten nook? If there be, (I the narrator) do not know it; if there were
in the days when he guided Beryl Molozane thither, the accountant did not know it either.
Along the lonely streets they paced; past the Dutch Church, round the courtyard
where stands the great house with the large portico, round, and round, and
round, talking to her; the accountant never wondered how his (george's clients)
were faring in the interim; listening to him, Beryl forgot about Bayswater and
her grandmother (maria elsenham) altogether.
Into every nook and corner of Austin Friars they penetrated, up and down every
street, and lane, and passage they wandered, and in that little desert in the
middle of a great City, George Geith poured the old, old story of his love and
his disappointment into sympathetic ears. 
How he had longed to make her his wife, how he had worked for her sake, how he
had been flung back from the very summit of success, how he had feared to ask
her to link her lot with poverty, all these things he told her as they walked
through Austin Friars, in the hush, and calm, and sunshine of that lovely August afternoon.
He told her precisely what suited himself, everything which looked well in the
picture he grouped together for her inspection; and for the rest, the girl had
no near relation living to ask about the darker shadows, about the memories
hanging beside the river's brink, at the point where the stream of his life
diverged from the Church into trade. 
She put no questions, he had to invent no falsehoods, she had perfect faith in
him; why should she ask anything concerning his antecedents? In her own past
there was no solitary event she desired to conceal, and it was therefore all
the easier for her to believe what he said implicitly.
With the sunshine streaming upon her, with no cloud in the sky above, with the
only man she had ever cared sufficiently for, to make parting from him a
regret, at her side, was it not natural that she should hearken to him kindly,
that she should believe him implicitly? 
And all he told her, she (beryl) had the best of good reasons for believing,
because it was true, true as they both lived, as they both had suffered, that
George Geith loved her devotedly, would love her till he died. 
If in the past there did lie a skeleton, was he altogether to blame for letting
the dry bones rest, for making no mention of the sorrow that had robbed him of his youth? 
When, in the future, Beryl stood face to face with that sorrow, when she had to
bear her part of the common trouble, she never reproached him even in thought
for his concealment; and at the time of which (I the narrator) am now writing,
it was happiness enough for her to know "she loved, she was beloved," without
insisting on visiting every secret chamber in the heart of the man who was for
the future to be to her, all in all. 
That was the end of it, never a wooing was shorter, never a love-tale proved
easier in the telling. True, the girl was not so quick about her answer as
might have been desired, but then the circumstances were against a speedy
answer, and it was but natural that, surprised and flurried, she should require
time to collect her thoughts, and gather her scattered senses together. 
"And I should like, Mr Geith," she said, as they walked along London Wall and
down Monkwell Street, and across Falcon Square, and so to the cab-stand in St
Martin's-le-Grand; "I should like not only to talk what you have said over with
Matilda, but also to be quite certain you mean it, that you have not spoken in
a hurry, and that you will not repent when you get back to Fen Court."
"And how shall I ever be able to assure you of that," he answered, "unless I
can see you often enough to repeat the same thing till you grow weary of hearing it?"
"It seems so much as if  as if " she hesitated. 
"As if you had come to bring happiness to a wretched, lonely being," he
finished. "Ah! Beryl, believe me, I should never have told you what I have told
you, at such a time and in such a place, had I seen any hope of speaking to you
in your grandmother (maria elsenahm)'s house. Shall I come and ask her for you
formally?" he added. "Shall I say, 'Madam, I have not a penny independent of my
business, and still I aspire to marry your grandchild?' What would she do? 
order the footman to turn me out, I suppose."
"I think it is very likely she might," sighed Beryl; "but yet I wish  oh! I do wish so much-"
"That you could have foreseen everything that has happened to-day, and never
come to the City at all?" he asked. 
"No, but I wish you had said what you have said to me today when papa (mr
molozane) was living. I wish he had told me. I did not think he would have kept
anything back. I know I had no secrets from him."
"He doubtless thought it best," answered George sorrowfully, "and God knows I
thought it best too. But, Beryl," he added, smiling in spite of himself at her
little coquetry, at her transparent affectation of keeping him in suspense, at
her poor pretence of not knowing whether to answer yes or no, at the barrier
she made believe to erect for the sole purpose of knocking it down again; "but,
Beryl, if you would have had me then, why cannot you terminate my misery, and
assure me you will have me now?"
"You are not miserable," she pouted, "you know quite well; that is, I mean that is, you are sure "
"Of what your answer will be?" he suggested. "May I say it for you? I am to be
happy  you will share my poverty, you will be my wife? "
"I shall not tell you," she said; "you want to know too much. I shall not say anything more now."
And the Beryl of old, the Beryl he had first loved amongst the green fields of
Hertfordshire, came back in tone, in manner, in look as she spoke; came back
and stood beside him so really for a moment, that but for her deep mourning
dress, and her thin, pale face, George might have thought the last few years a
dream, and the streets through which they were walking alone together, an illusion of his senses. 
"There is one thing at all events which you will not write to me," he said,
standing by the door of the cab he had procured for her; "promise me that,
Beryl; you will not, surely you will not write me 'No'?"
She did not reply in words, apparently she had made up her mind that she would
not be compelled to answer him against her will; but he felt the hand he held
clasp his tightly, and he saw that though she was trying to smile, as if in
mockery of him, her eyes were full of tears. 
"I will rest satisfied, then; I will try to be patient," he answered; and while
the cab jolted over the stones to Bayswater, he walked back to Fen Court,
feeling that since morning a volume had been opened to him he then thought sealed for ever. 
When he entered his office, his first care was for (Royal the dog), who had sat
since his departure watching the scarf with a gravity fitting the dignity of
deportment he affected. 
"That is my fine dog," said George, taking the scarf from between the animal's
paws, and it is not too much to add that the accountant could have blessed
(Royal the dog) for bringing Beryl to Fen Court. 
"Come here, old fellow," was the invitation further extended, as George saw him
wandering about the two rooms, evidently searching for something which neither
apartment contained. "Come here, old fellow; are we not to be good friends,
(Royal the dog)? Shall we he staunch friends, for the sake of the old days
departed, for the hope of the good days to come?"
Gravely and solemnly the retriever surveyed his new master; quietly he
listened, as though every word conveyed some meaning to his ear; and at last,
when George had quite finished, (Royal the dog) sat down on his haunches and
lifted one paw, in token of amity and acceptation towards his new master. 
During the days that came and went after that, Mr Geith found great comfort in
his companion. He felt sure Beryl would not forget the man who had her
favourite in charge. (Royal the dog) was a link between them, Royal would
compel her to write, if consideration for him did not. So the accountant,
self-tormenting, like all men in love, consoled himself, as though a hundred
Royals could have been of so much importance as one George Geith. Beryl deluded
herself with no such idea, at any rate. It was not long before a note from her
arrived in Fen Court, a note stating she had got a terrible scolding on her
return home, but that her sin in finding a home for (Royal the dog) seemed now forgotten. 
"It might not so soon," she added, "if grandmamma knew where I had lodged him. "
The very same day," went on the writer, "she (grandmamma) (maria elsenham)
caught a cold out driving, and now she is laid up with it completely, and
unable to leave her room. If, therefore, you could call now, I think you might
have a chance of seeing me, more particularly if you called early, say at twelve o'clock."
Not another sentence; no "no;" nothing, except that she remained his sincerely,
Beryl Molozane, which was all very well in its way, but George had expected a
more definite reply, and was disappointed accordingly. 
As a matter of course, however, the accountant proceeded to Bayswater, where he
had the pleasure of seeing Beryl solus, Mrs Elsenham being still confined to bed. 
"I have not spoken to Matilda," said Beryl to George Geith, as they sat in Mrs
Elsenham's drawing-room, the splendour whereof somehow made the lover think he
had done a very wicked thing in asking Beryl to link her lot with his. "I have
not spoken to Matilda, because I was afraid of doing anything to compromise her
with grandmamma. Whatever I do, Mr Geith, I find I must do it on my own
responsibility. It would not be right to run any chance of injuring her, would it?"
George thought decidedly it would not; and by degrees all Beryl's troubles were
explained, how Mr (dick elsenham) and Mrs Richard Elsenham were jealous of her
growing influence over Mrs Elsenham senior. "Sometimes they say I am a toady,
and sometimes they call her a stingy, unprincipled old wretch," Beryl
explained, "and whatever they say, it always amounts to this, that we are both
doing them an injury. Grandmamma does not like Matilda now as she used," went
on the girl; "and I greatly question whether she will ever leave Dick a penny.
So long as they were quite dependent on her, they used to be grateful and
respectful, but now they are neither; and grandmamma does not like it, and says
if I marry to her mind she will make me her sole heiress."
"And shall you marry to her mind?" asked George breathlessly. 
"No, Mr Geith, I have quite made up my mind to that; so I shall never have a penny."
"Mrs Elsenham wishes you to marry some protg of her own, I presume?" he suggested. 
"Yes, but I will not marry to please her; she has no right to ask me to do such
a thing, and I should have no right to gratify her."
"You have quite made up your mind to that?" he repeated. "Have you made up your
mind also, Beryl, to give up all these advantages, all certainty of position,
all hope of wealth, and cast your lot with mine?"
She did not say whether she had or not; but she put out both hands with a
pretty gesture of assent, stretched them to him eagerly, as though she were
giving herself at the same time. 
Evidently she expected him thus to take the gift she offered, but George was
not going to be contented with such ambiguous replies for the future, and
taking Beryl to his heart, asked if she were certain she would confer on him a
right to keep her there for ever? 
"And if ever I give you cause to repent your choice, to repent the trust you
have reposed in me, may God make me regret that the sun ever rose for me on
this the happiest day of my life."
Prophetic words, though they were spoken without the slightest idea that in the
mournful hereafter they would be remembered with a bitterness like unto the
bitterness of death. Prophetic; though they sounded to Beryl but as an
assurance of the truth and loyalty of the man she had chosen. 
Now that there was a rival in the case, George knew that the sooner all matters
were arranged the better for them both. 
In his hands Beryl was content to leave everything. Vaguely she felt that,
deceiving her grandmother (maria elsenham) as she was, the sooner she ceased
living under her roof and eating her bread the better; and accordingly she
agreed, without hesitation, to George's proposal for their marriage to take
place as soon as might be. 
"I shall tell no one until it is all over," said the young lady; "I never could
face grandmamma's anger unless I were ready to fly from her on the spot. Write
to me what you wish me to do, and send your letter to Matilda, but do not write
more than the once. It may seem to you ridiculous, but I am afraid of
grandmamma (maria elsenham) now. She might lock me up in a madhouse; she might
kill me; I am sure I do not know what Granny might not do, if she had the
slightest idea I was going to run away with you."
"It will not be long before I free you from her control," George answered,
laughing, and he proved as good his word, for he settled the necessary
preliminaries so rapidly that before another month was over, Beryl and he left
St Matthew's, Bayswater, man and wife. 
She had slipped out of the house long ere her grandmother's usual hour of
rising, and walked in the most matter-of-fact way conceivable with George
Geith, who was waiting close at hand for her, to church. 
She had no bridesmaid, he no groomsman; the (st matthew's clerk) gave her away,
the pew-opener had a supply of water in the vestry ready for emergencies, but
Beryl had not the slightest idea of fainting. If she trembled it was not at the
thought of entrusting George with the care of her future life, but because she
dreaded the interview with her grandmother (maria elsenham), which she knew was close at hand. 
In ten minutes Beryl Molozane was transformed into Beryl Geith. The marriage
was as good as though the ceremony had been performed in the presence of fifty
witnesses, and there can be no reason to doubt but that the (st matthew's
clerk) and pew-opener found the money put into their hands by the happy
bridegroom quite as acceptable as though the pair had come separately in
carriages, accompanied by a squad of relations and a bevy of bridesmaids.
"Are you sorry, Beryl?" he asked, as they passed out of the church. 
"No, but I dread facing Granny, after what I have done."
"Why need you face her? can you not write?"
"I will bid her good-bye properly," said Beryl, "though it is very likely she
will tell me to make haste and leave the house while I am in the middle of my
sentence. She has tried to be kind to me, and I must see her for the last time.
Besides," added (Mrs Beryl Geith), "if we are going, as you say, to the Isle of
Wight, I shall require some clothes to wear there, and I should like to take my
luggage away from grandmamma's now."
"With all my heart," said George, but if I add that this courage was assumed,
and that he really quaked at the thought of an encounter with Mrs Elsenham, the
reader will, I trust, have sympathy for him. 
He would rather have undertaken a pilgrimage than a visit to Mrs Elsenham. He
would sooner have encountered a lion than his wife's grandmother, who stood at
the top of the first flight of stairs as the newly-married pair entered the hall. 
Further than the hall the lady would not permit him to penetrate, and she would
have denied him the pleasure of kicking his heels on the oil-cloth, but that he
flatly refused to leave the house till he took his wife out of it with him. 
"If you think she shall ever have a halfpenny from me, you are greatly
mistaken," shrieked Mrs Elsenham; "I would rather give it to a beggar in the
street; I would sooner endow some charity or found a hospital than let her have
a sixpence, the ungrateful, deceitful minx."
"Do not talk to him like that, grandmamma," said Beryl imploringly; "we do not
want your money, we will never trouble you for any help, only let me get my
things, and we will leave the house at once."
"If you had had the spirit of a man," screamed the lady, perfectly unmindful of
Beryl's intercession, "you would have come and asked me for her, and not stolen
her like a thief in the night. How am I to know she is married to you? I always
told her father (mr molozane) he was mad to have you so much at the house. I
wrote to you myself that you should not call here. I have been a parent to her,
and would have done more for her than her parents ever did; I was growing fond
of her. I had set my heart on her making a good match, and you have robbed me
of her; you have not taken her fairly like an honourable man, but meanly and
clandestinely, like a low adventurer as you are."
"Grandmamma, for pity's sake," expostulated Beryl, in a whisper, "remember the
servants (mrs elsenham's servants)."
"I do not care about the servants," retorted Mrs Elsenham, who was fairly
beside herself with rage. "They know who I wished you to marry, and they shall
know, likewise, who it is you have chosen to marry. A man without a shilling. A
poor accountant in the City. A person whom, had he called to speak to me on
business, I should not have allowed to sit down in my presence; who, at the
present moment, only stands in my hall on sufferance."
Standing in her hall on sufferance, George had, nevertheless, the best of the
position. It was, perhaps, a conviction of this fact that made Mrs Elsenham try
her utmost to humble him in the presence of her servants. 
But the accountant was not a man to be humbled by any remarks of hers. He was
not a person to bandy words with an angry woman; and he stood leaning against
the hall table, with his hat in his hand, listening in as calm a silence, to
her passionate ravings, as though he had been born deaf and dumb. 
The only sentence he spoke in the house was addressed to his wife. 
"Beryl," he said, "I wish you would get your things quickly, or we shall miss our train."
"By Jove," observed the (Elsenham butler), subsequently, to a select company
assembled in the servants' hall, "it's a thousand pities he hasn't got no
money, if so be he hasn't, as the old cat (Maria Elsenham) says, which is a
subject that I entertains my doubts on myself f. I never see, and all here is
aware this is the smallest establishment with which I have ever been connected,
a gentleman conduct himself better under aggravation than Mr Geith. Mentioning
which, everybody knows Geith to be a good name, whether in the City or the
West-end. And so 'ere's to Miss (Beryl)'s 'ealth, (Mrs Beryl Geith) as now is."
"He is worth fifty of that other skinflint, missus wanted her to take," added
the footman (elsenham footman). "He tipped me half a sov. for getting him a
cab, as readily as that other d-d fool would a curse."
"If so be he could have paved the steps with gold, for her to walk out over,
he'd a done it," said the (Elsenham butler). From which observations it may be
inferred that George had not spared his purse, nor its contents either, in the
course of his exit from Mrs Elsenham's abode. 
"I am so thankful not to have to go through that again," remarked Beryl with a
sigh of relief, as she nestled down in the cab beside her husband. "George, are
we going straight to the station, because I am so hungry. I have not had a scrap of breakfast yet."
"My poor little wife," said the new-made husband, laughing, "neither have I;"
and he put his head out of the cab-window, and told the man (cab-driver) to
pull up at the door of an hotel, which they were just then passing. There was
something so comical about neither of them having had a morsel to eat, and
about both proving most genuinely and unsentimentally ready for a substantial
breakfast, that Beryl soon recovered her spirits, and made George laugh in
spite of himself at Mrs Elsenham's virtuous indignation. 
"Poor Granny," finished the incorrigible young lady, "she will miss me for a
day or two, and then she will either get some poor soul of a companion to
tyrannize over, or else take Tilly back into favour, perhaps do both. Anyhow,
she has done with me now, except, perhaps, ' to point a moral or adorn a tale.'
How astonished Tilly will be to hear of my performances. Granny has sent for
her, I am certain; and the two are sitting together calling down fire from
heaven on my head. And as for yours, I wonder it is on your shoulders. How
could you take it so coolly? I admired you beyond everything for your sublime indifference."
"We have lost one train, Beryl," suggested her husband (george geith), "and if
you do not make haste we shall miss another."
"I suppose," said Beryl, when they were fairly seated in the railway carriage,
and rattling by express along the South-Western line, "I suppose I shall never
have any free will again as long as I live. I suppose I shall have to do what
you tell me now, for ever and for ever?"
"Should you like to take back your freedom? " he asked gravely; "are you sorry
you have married me? Are you positive you did not decide too hastily? that you
love me really and truly, as much as I love you?"
For a minute she did not answer; she looked out of the window at the hedges and
trees, and fields and houses, as the train sped on. She went back and back over
the years she had known this man, who was now her husband, ere she said: 
"George, I will tell you something, if you promise not to let it make you very vain."
"I will try not to be too much uplifted by the secret, whatever it may be," he answered. 
"I have been thinking about how long I have liked you," she said, with her
sweet face hidden on his shoulders; "and, though I am not certain, still I
believe I would have married you months, and months, and months before we left
the Dower House, if you had asked me."
"Thank you, Beryl," and he kissed her with a feeling of something very like
reverence; "thank you, and may God bless you, my darling! for your innocent
love and unquestioning trust."
CHAPTER 41. THE CITY

As a rule, there is nothing so romantic as lovemaking. As a rule, likewise,
there is nothing so prosaic as matrimony. 
Lovemaking is fairyland; marriage but everyday life, of which some make a good
thing, and others an evil. 
Lovemaking is the evening entertainment, with the lamps lighted, and the
scenery shifting, and the actresses and actors making their best speeches,
singing their sweetest songs; whilst matrimony is the nailing and hammering and
actual language of every-day life. 
Lovemaking is the Spanish castle of youth, filled with grand furniture, soft
couches, sweet flowers, gushing fountains, singing birds, pleasant perfumes,
tenanted by a dream woman, dressed in impossible garments, wreathed with
smiles, living for one person and one alone, utterly lifted above the sphere of
ordinary existence, and consequently far beyond the consideration of mundane affairs. 
Matrimony, on the contrary, is the eight or ten roomed home of manhood, with
one of Broadwood's second-hand pianos in the drawing-room, linen covers on the
stair-carpeting, oil-cloth and an umbrella stand in the hall, a pervading smell
of dinner in every nook and corner, with a woman just like any other woman
sitting by the domestic hearth, darning stockings while she thinks of the
peculations of her cook or the short-comings of her housemaid. 
And yet to the terrible reality of the latter picture there are occasional
exceptions which, it may be, prove the rule. If he (George) had married her
(Beryl) in the days of his prosperity, if he had taken her for wife as any
other Christian would when he possessed a comfortable competence, and the means
of providing her with the eight or ten roomed house and appendages, of some of
which (I the narrator) have made honourable mention, if he had taken her from
among the Dower House roses to a suburban residence, whence he would have
journeyed into the City every morning by omnibus; and where they would duly
have formed commonplace acquaintances, and learnt to take an interest in the
goings and comings of their next-door neighbours, (I the narrator) think the
romance would soon have been rubbed off their lives, and that they might have
become in course of time intensely respectable, amazingly uninteresting. 
As it was, however, if their lovemaking were sadly prosaic, if their wedding
were fearfully matter-of-fact, if they had learnt beforehand that, without a
shadow of doubt, it was as man and woman, not as hero and heroine, they were
taking one another for better, for worse; if through adverse circumstances they
were cheated out of something which falls to the lot of most people, and which
most find it pleasant to look back upon through all the cares and troubles of
after-life, they had yet by way of a balance, romance in matrimony, and such
happiness, spite of all their anxieties, as does not as a rule go home with
those couples, whose marriage have been conducted on the strictest principles
of political economy, and whose settlements, on both sides, have met with the
approval of parents and guardians, and the warmest congratulations of friends. 
Never a man had courage to marry on smaller means than the accountant of Fen
Court. No woman ever with her eyes open wedded to greater poverty, to closer
economy, than Beryl Molozane, and yet having health and hope, and one another,
the pair held that they were happy; and if the proof of the pudding be in the
eating, they were right. 
In the whole of London  east, west, north, and south  there could not have been
found, (I the narrator) think, a more contented, more united couple, than (Mr
Geith) and (Mrs Beryl Geith), of Catherine Court  for it was in Catherine Court
the newly-married pair in due time took up their abode; and if you want to find
the quiet little nook which rejoices in the above unmelodious name, (I the
narrator) can only say it used to lie, and for aught (I the narrator) know to
the contrary, lies still, close to Savage Gardens, Tower Hill, Trinity Square,
Muscovy Court, Great Tower Street, Seething Lane, and Fenchurch Street. 
Within five minutes' walk of George's office, better than a palace in the
country, were their modest apartments in Catherine Court to the young wife. He
could come home for dinner now. No housekeeper made any more tea for the
accountant in the days of which (I the narrator) write. After office hours were
over, Beryl carried her work across to Fen Court, and sewed there whilst her
husband (george geith) finished his work. When he had a leisure evening they
had long walks through the City  long walks in the gaslight, where they
explored forsaken courts, and found out the queerest houses and lanes imaginable. 
Without friends, without relations, without even acquaintances, the two
Ishmaelites delighted in their life. They had not the opinions of the world to
consider. If they paid their (catherine court landlady) regularly, it did not
signify to her how many courses they had for dinner, or whether, indeed, they
had any dinner at all, only the less cooking they required the better she was
pleased. There were no old friends to make lamentation over "poor Beryl's
shocking choice," no relations to mourn about "dear George having married a
penniless girl when he might have looked higher."
They were, happy mortals, alone in the world; alone for better, for worse, for
joy or for sorrow: and as there was no one to come between them, no one to put
notions in the head of either, they were all the world to one another. 
The struggle, too, for necessaries, the necessity for pinching and contriving,
drew them daily closer and closer. The man had to work hard, and Beryl could
not afford to be idle either. How she revelled in George's wardrobe; how
triumphantly she brought old garments to light, and made them with her busy
fingers new again. What an achievement it was to be able to save laying out a
sovereign. What a bright, cheerful little wife it was, who, day after day, sat
at the window, thimble on finger, needlework in hand, waiting and watching for
the return of her husband, who looked up at her from the time he entered the
court till she left her seat and ran down-stairs to greet him. 
Of such a life there cannot, of necessity, be much to tell. Of happiness a
writer can rarely find much to say, and yet (I the narrator) had fain linger
over those days, which were the brightest they ever knew. As for (Royal the
dog), never in his life had he been surrounded by such swarms of devoted
admirers as in the City. Whether he sauntered out for a morning ramble in the
neighbourhood of Catherine Court, whether he accompanied Beryl to the shops
where she dealt, whether he marched beside George to Fen Court, whether he lay
stretched on the pavement before the office door, or gravely kept watch and
ward over the accountant's papers, he still met with some flattering remark,
some complimentary observation.
Had he been an alderman, the citizens could not have catered for him more
zealously. Wherever he went he got something to eat; and he took all the
refreshment which was offered to him as a king might have accepted tribute.
Women, after the manner of the sex, called him "poor fellow," and laid their
hands upon him respectfully; men stopped to remark what a fine dog he was,
whilst children idolized him. A happy day it. was for the juvenile fry when
(Royal the dog) took his abode in the midst of them; and amongst the commonest
of everyday sights was it to see a crowd of children gathered about the
entrance to Catherine Court, and talking to the dog as if he were a human
being, and could understand every word they said. 
Generally, there was a little girl of some two or three years old, clasping his
great neck, and calling him her own wise toty Oyal. If anyone had stolen him,
(I the narrator) think the thief could not long have escaped detection; had any
harm happened to him, the population would have donned some kind of mourning;
but as it was, no evil came to him, and the dog walked about, the delight and
ornament of the neighbourhood in which he dwelt. 
Once, and once only, Mrs Richard Elsenham penetrated to Catherine Court. She
came in her carriage, and the horses (dick and matilda's horses) ran the risk
of their lives in the middle of a block in Fenchurch Street. 
Her (matilda's coachman) tried Great Tower Street, going back by way of a
change; but finding that worse, plunged into still deeper depths of misery in
Lower Thames Street, from which place he was only too glad to emerge by the
time he got to Fish Street Hill. 
"Good God, Beryl," exclaimed the fine lady (matilda), surprised into vehemence
by fright and astonishment, "what can induce Mr Geith to let you live in a
place like this? Stock Orchard Crescent was princely in comparison."
"My dear Matilda, don't distress yourself, it does very well indeed for me,"
answered Beryl. "If I have not got a very magnificent house, there is peace in
it; if my husband (george geith) be not rich, and is forced to work hard, he
loves me better than anything else in the world, and spends every leisure moment with me."
Which speech left (Mrs Beryl Geith) very decidedly the winner, for Mr
Elsenham's house was not the abode of peace, and he did not love his wife, and
he never remained with her for a minute, when he could get away. 
"And do not come to see me again, Tilly," said Beryl, at parting, "for it is
only running the chance of offending grandmamma  (maria elsenham), and
incurring the certainty of annoying yourself. We will write to one another; is
not that enough? We have each chosen our path, and mine leads me far away from you."
"If you believe me, she looks absolutely happy," said Mrs Richard Elsenham when
speaking of her visit to her grandmother; "and she seems to think she is better
off than she was here, poor, deluded creature."
"I suppose she was not deluded in one respect," remarked (Maria Elsenham),
dryly. "The man must have been fond of her."
Fond of her! was fond any word to use about the matter? If (Maria Elsenham) had
been able to look down into George Geith's heart she would have found that
there was no George Geith lest there, that it was all Beryl, nothing else. 
He loved her as such men do love, when they meet with something worth lavishing
their affections on, idolatrously; and it is not too much to say that he would
more cheerfully have died for her, than lived without her. 
What if she had lost something of her old elasticity, of her girlish
light-heartedness? Did she seem any the less loveable to him because, in
watching beside sickness, in walking among graves, she had learnt there was
trouble in this life as well as joy? 
Anyhow, in any mood, sorrowful or gay, Beryl appeared charming to the man with
whom she had linked her lot (george), whilst on her side she could not find a
fault save one, viz., that as time went on she saw a certain sadness clouding
her husband's face, a wistful, anxious look abiding in his eyes.
What might be the cause of his trouble Beryl could not imagine: business seemed
going much as usual; if Mr Foss had taken some of her husband's customers
(george's clients), her husband (george) seemed, nevertheless, to have as much
work as he was able to get through. 
Gradually their walks grew fewer, her evening visits to Fen Court more
frequent, yet still he kept always complaining some persons' books were falling
behind, that it was an awful nuisance the days were not forty-eight hours long, and so on. 
"Could not a clerk help you?" she ventured one evening, after he had wearily
repeated the same old story, when she was sitting beside his office fire and he
continuing the same monotonous round of addition as had been his lot for years. 
"I cannot afford to have one just at present," he answered. 
"And could not I be of any use, George? I am a terrible stupid, I know, and as
slow as a canal boat; but still, in the course of the day I surely could manage
to get through what would be only an hour or two's work for you."
"I think my darling has plenty to do as it is," he answered, and he came over
beside her as he spoke. 
"I have nothing to do," she replied, eagerly, "nothing from morning till night,
and I should so enjoy being useful, George, it would be such fun to play at
business. Will you let me try? give me a task," she added, laughing, "till you
see if I can accomplish it."
But spite of her entreaties he would not find her any work; he insulted her
handwriting and scoffed at her knowledge of figures; he ridiculed the idea of
his little girl, his own Beryl, developing into a hard-headed, business woman,
with City phrases ready on the tip of her tongue, and no subjects of
conversation except the price of money, and the chances of lower discounts; and
finally, after he had mocked at the proposition for about five minutes, and
laughed the idea of useful employment out of her head, he went back to his
desk, and mounted his stool, and turned over the page, and commenced labouring
away at another column. 
So the time went by, till Beryl, wearying of her own occupation, put aside her
stitching, and crossing her hands idly in her lap, began looking into the fire,
and so finally fell a musing. How long she sat thus she never knew; but
something, she could not exactly tell what, roused her at length from her
meditations, and made her look suddenly towards her husband. 
Probably, though she was seated with her back to his desk, she felt by that
quiet instinct which seems intuitive to women, that he had ceased work, that he
was engaged in some way different from usual, for when she turned she saw he
had pushed his papers aside, and was leaning forward, with his hands resting on
the desk and his head lying on them.
"George, are you ill? For mercy's sake speak to me! George, what is the matter?
whatever it may be don't keep it from me."
She was beside him as she said this, she twined her arms round his neck, she
put her face down to his, and would have kissed him, but that he turned his cheek from her caress. 
"My darling, what is it? what have I done? what is the matter? "and she tore
his hands away in her desperation, to see that he was crying like a child. 
"Oh! George, oh! my love, my love!" and she drew his head towards her, and laid
his face on her shoulder, and let him sob out his trouble there, asking no
question more. By degrees he told her all, however; how his wearied brain
refused to work longer at his bidding, how his figures confused him, how his
old correctness, his former certainty, had been leaving him day by day; how it
had lately taken him an hour to get through the business he had formerly been
able to manage easily in ten minutes; how, in fact, for the second time in his
City career, his capital had gone from him. 
"First money, then health," he said, as with trembling hands he tried to
arrange his papers and put them together in his usual orderly manner. "And what
is to become of us without either, God only knows, I do not."
Religious sentiments, Scriptural quotations, had never come very readily to
Beryl Molozane, but a thought passed through her mind that the God her husband
spoke of had provided, that He would provide. 
Yet for her life Beryl could not have put this feeling into words; she could
only say: "George, dear, do not be down-hearted. Come home, and have a good
night's sleep, and do not work so hard for a day or two. For, one thing,
to-morrow will be Sunday; are you not thankful to remember that?"
"If it had not been for Sundays," answered George, and as he spoke he had a
jumble of Deuteronomy and the French Revolution, and a whole host of other
things mixed up in his head together, "if it had not been for Sundays, I should
have been dead long ago."
"Well, then, let us both be thankful for them," she said: "and do not be
dispirited. There, let me add it up," and Beryl slowly and painfully worked her
way to the top of the column. 
"What did you make it, George? That is quite right, you see. What nonsense you
have been talking. I believe you are half asleep already. Put away your things,
and let us get home at once."
Dear heart, tender wife, with her own spirit sinking, she could scold him hopefully thus!
When, in the great day of eternal reckoning, the names of the real heroes of
this world are revealed, (I the narrator) think, and hope, and believe it will
be found that love, true love, has made the staunchest martyrs, the bravest men
and women out of, to our thinking, the unlikeliest materials, the most arrant cowards.
CHAPTER 42. A LITTLE DISCOVERY. 

Like many another wise adviser, Beryl did not follow, in her own person, the
admirable counsel she had given to her husband, for it struck five o'clock on
Sunday morning before she closed her eyes. 
Thinking  thinking wearily and hopelessly  Beryl lay awake the whole night
long, wondering, as many an anxious wife has wondered before and since, how she
could help her husband; how, with her poor strength, she might manage to keep
the wheels of his business from rolling back down the hill he had managed to
mount so far. How could she do it? How could she, who had not brought him
friends, or money, or connection, aid him now? Over and over the same old
ground she went, till she grew mortally sick of traversing it; plan after plan
she perfected and discarded, till even her young head ached with its unwonted
exertions. She could do nothing; she was not clever; she had no talent of any
kind; she might take in needlework, to be sure, but then what could she earn at
needlework? She might teach young children; she might establish a little
school, that the fry of small boys and girls belonging to the people in the
neighbourhood, could, perhaps, in time, be induced to attend; but if she did,
what then? Would her work satisfy her husband? What, to come back to the
original question, was he to do? What plan, what reasonable hopeful plan for
the future, could she suggest to him? 
If he looked out for a situation as book-keeper, and got one, he would have to
labour away at figures still. No matter what post he occupied in the City,
accounts would, she knew, form some portion of his daily work; and if he were
in another man's employment, those accounts would have to be got through ill or
well; further, would George ever be able to bear being at the beck and call of
any employer; he who had, for so long a time, known no master save himself and necessity? 
Could he not try something different from the business of an accountant? She
would ask him the very first opportunity; she really thought he might, and
wondered the idea had not occurred to him. Surely there were at least a
thousand different ways for a man to earn his bread in London, and it would be
hard, indeed, if one like George starved in the midst of plenty. 
He must give up accounts, that was all; and Beryl, on the strength of this
simple arrangement, fell fast asleep. When, however, she unfolded her scheme to
her husband, he regarded it as so utterly impracticable that Beryl's hopes sunk again below zero. 
"It is all very well to say, 'Do something else;' but what else am I to do?
Every business requires, at least, a small amount of capital, and a
considerable amount of knowledge. But do not let us talk about it now, Beryl,
let us take the day of rest for rest."
Beryl was not able to do it; she could hold her tongue; she could cease
worrying her husband; she could talk to him on other subjects, but she could
not divert her thoughts from the one great trouble which had fallen upon them both. 
In church she heard very little of the service, except such portions as
referred to those who were in sorrow and in great distress; and as they walked
along the streets she looked at every warehouse, wondering if George could not
possibly commence in some impossible trade, and make his fortune in a week or two. 
When in the afternoon he lay on the sofa in their little sitting room fast
asleep, Beryl, instead of reading, as was her wont, sat by the window
marvelling whence help would come.
"Had they not better emigrate?" she asked herself; "could they not clear a
place in the woods for themselves, and build a log-house, and live happy ever afterwards."
But then, alas! people were unable to emigrate without going over the sea, and
Beryl had been so horribly sick even in crossing to the Isle of Wight, that if
her husband's business had not compelled his return to Fen Court, Beryl would
have stayed on the Island all her life sooner than undergo such misery again. 
"I should never live to see land," thought this wretched little sailor; "if I
went to New Zealand, or Australia, or America, or any of those places that are
thousands of miles away; besides, emigrating requires money, too," she
recollected gleefully, rejoiced to find that the same objection held good
against the plans she disliked as against the plans she advocated. "Could not
George rest for a little while? "she asked herself, only to remember next
minute that if he rested he would lose his connection. Would it be hopeless for
her to try to help him? Beryl was willing to do what lay in her power, but with
all her good will she recoiled from the idea of addition. In her heart she felt
she could undergo any torture for George, run any risk, face any danger, submit
to any privation, but addition; Beryl's courage ebbed away at that idea, slunk
off at the very notion, like a coward. 
Still the wife thought on, casting about in every direction for some straw to
seize. During the whole of Sunday, and for many a weary hour after she laid her
head on the pillow at night, Beryl pondered where she could turn for help.
Monday morning arrived, and the accountant went back to his drudgery again.
Monday night arrived, and once more Beryl sat in his office waiting till he had
forced himself to finish his work, till he should be willing to go home. 
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday came, bringing with them fresh toil, increasing
weariness, and Beryl was thinking that if the strain were continued much longer
she should not be able to endure it either, when suddenly out of the darkness a
light at last flashed forth. She had one friend, who might be willing to help
her in her need, Mr Finch. 
Quite in a flutter of excitement, Beryl laid aside her work, put on her bonnet,
and started off to Fore Street. She would not speak to her husband first, he
might object, he might argue, he might a hundred things, and Beryl was not
going to be kept back from running after this light, let the consequences prove
what they chose. If she could not trust to her own sense in a matter of this
kind, in what matter could she trust it? And Beryl, having finished this neat
little argument satisfactorily, found herself before the door of Mr Finch's
great warehouse in a state of such breathless excitement, that she had to walk
on as far as Jewin Crescent and back again before she felt it would be prudent
for her to solicit an interview. 
Mr Finch was in. Mr Finch remembered his visitor in a moment, and "God blessed"
himself to any extent at sight of her. He had heard of her father (mr
molozane)'s death, had attended his funeral, indeed, but he had not heard of
her marriage, and was greatly surprised at the news in consequence. 
"So she had married the gentleman who was down arranging her father's affairs
(george geith); a very nice, intelligent kind of person he seemed to be too. 
"You know," added Mr Finch, "we all thought you would have had pity on poor
Werne, it was a sad thing you could not like him; but as you did not like him,
you did the right thing, (Mrs Beryl Geith), that is what my sister (miss finch)
and I often said. How surprised she will be, to be sure!"
At which point (Mrs Beryl Geith) ventured to remind him of the object of her visit. 
"It's odd now, ain't it," answered Mr Finch, when he had brought back his
thoughts from the days when the Molozanes and he were near neighbours, "that I
had a gentleman (mr bidwell) in with me three times within as many weeks,
wanting my advice about the sale of a little apparatus he exhibited at the
Great Show in Hyde Park. He has a business, a good business, in Stockport,
which it would not pay him anyhow to leave, and so he wants somebody to push
his invention in London. It's a first-rate thing so far as I am a judge, a
thing I would take up myself if I had not my hands too full already. He is in
town now, he is stopping at Miller's Hotel, in Bow Lane, and I will send down
and tell him I want to see him in the morning. We can call on Mr Geith if you
like. There is no doubt but he can have the agency, supposing he likes to take it."
"Mr Finch, would you mind calling on my husband, without saying anything about
having seen me?" asked Beryl, who was all of a tremble at the thought of what
she had done, and of how George would take it. 
"Not a bit of it," returned Mr Finch, heartily, "I am only too glad to do you a
good turn, if it lies in my power. You are not looking as well as you might do
yourself; you ought to come down to Withefell, and get the colour back in your
cheeks. I have often and often been wondering where you were and what had
become of you, but I certainly never expected to see you here, never."
"Now you have seen me here, though," answered Beryl, "you will do your best to
help me, won't you, Mr Finch?"
"Indeed, I will; if one thing fails, another shall not fail," said Mr Finch,
heartily, and having received this assurance, Beryl walked back to Catherine
Court in such a transport of delight, that it was well George's clients
detained him at his office past the usual hour, or he would have marvelled what
had occurred to make his wife so joyful. 
Next day, when he came in to dinner, he told her Mr Finch and Mr Bidwell from
Stockport had called at his office to offer him a first-rate agency. 
"Mr Bidwell will pay the rent of an office and warehouse, and a clerk's salary
(bidwell clerk)," finished Mr Geith, "and if I cannot make a clear four hundred
a year out of this invention, I am greatly mistaken."
"When will it be settled, George?" she asked. 
"I am to see them again to-morrow," he said, "and if we arrange satisfactorily,
I will tell my little wife (beryl) what I intend doing. The first floor below
me, you understand, is to let, and the basement as well; now I thought if I
could take the whole house from the (fen court landlord), retaining the present
ground-floor tenant, we could get rid of Mrs Grimes and live with the business."
"Oh, George, how delicious!"
"Are you sure you would not find it dull?"
"Dull, so near you!"
"I was wondering this morning, Beryl, what I could do  what the end of it all
would be  for I knew it was impossible for me to continue my present business.
It was so strange Mr Finch thinking of me, was it not, Beryl?" 
She could keep it from him no longer. It was impossible she could conceal her
part in the affair for ever. So she threw herself on his neck, and weeping and
laughing, told him of her visit to Fore Street; of the fortunate moment at which it was timed. 
"I was so wretched, George, and I was afraid you would prevent my going," she finished. 
"And I am so glad, Beryl, and so thankful you went."
 From that time forth, till the day arrived when they removed into Fen Court,
the young wife was in a fever of excitement. 
She had never done talking about ways and means, about carpets, about
furniture, about a servant. If George had not loved her very dearly, if he had
not longed for a home, if the idea of setting up his household gods in Fen
Court had not been quite as pleasing to him as it was to Beryl, he would have
wearied of her chatter, and been unsympathizing with her delight; but, as it
was, the relief was to him so great, the idea of having a house of their own
seemed to both so charming, that the two were like a pair of children rejoicing
over a new plaything. 
If, in the old days departed, any one had suggested a home to him in Fen Court,
a wife who would be willing to reside in a house which commanded a view over
the trees in the churchyard on the one side, and over the pavement of Billiter
Square on the other, George Geith would have laughed the idea to scorn; but, by
this time, he was taught the great truth, that happiness is to be found in very
unlikely places, and that with Beryl and contentment, a hut was as good as a
palace, an office in the City as a mansion in the country. 
Catherine Court had been well enough, but Fen Court was better still. A wife in
the next street had once seemed too much happiness for the accountant; but a
wife on the premises, a wife separated from him by no sloppy pavements, whom he
could always lay his hand on, was bliss unspeakable. 
His old offices and the housekeeper (mrs grimes)'s former quarters were the
territories he made over to Beryl; whilst he himself moved into the first
floor; and, finally, as business increased, took the ground-floor into his own possession as well. 
As when he changed his banking account to Nortons', everything prospered with
him, so now when he added another business to his former profession, George
Geith made money in handfulls. 
Backed by a principal (mr bidwell), whose pet child he was nursing to maturity,
aided by Mr Finch and encouraged by Mr Finch's connection, the business road
seemed to the accountant bordered by flowers, carpeted with roses. 
True now, as formerly, he had to work hard, but what of that? His head work now
was done by clerks (two new clerks); his own personal work was seeing
principals, canvassing for orders, and making sure that those orders were duly executed. 
"If Bidwell had stopped his mill, and dismissed his hands (bidwell mill
employees), and come to London himself to have pushed this here patent," said
Mr Finch, "he could not have made the trade you have; and I can only say this,
Mr Geith, I respects a man as works as you do, and if I can put anything in
your way, I will, as sure as my name is what it is."
To which George replied that he thought Mr Finch had done quite enough, and
that he was grateful, and more than grateful, for his kindness. 
"I brought Bidwell for the sake of your wife (beryl), and because of the
friendship I felt for her father (mr molozane); but what I do for the future I
will do for you, Mr Geith, and there is my hand on it."
"I really do not know how to thank you," said the accountant, earnestly. 
"There is no necessity for thanks," replied Mr Finch; "and I tell you what,
when the fine weather comes you and your wife (beryl) must take a run down to
Withefell, and stay for a fortnight or so at the Hall. We only live in a plain
way, as you know, but what I can offer, you are heartily welcome to."
Meantime, was Beryl idle? By no means. There were fifty trifling ways in which
she could assist her husband now. Although he had two clerks (two new clerks),
she was the trustiest of all; one who would never talk about his business,
never discuss the contents of a private letter, never speak of the extent of
his trade. Little by little, Beryl came to have more to do with the business.
By degrees, she learnt how to arrange his papers, how to keep his bills, his
invoices, his receipt-notes, and his letters, so that at any minute she could
find him a particular account, or tell him where such and such a proposal was put. 
What a relief George found it not to have to waste his time in such little
matters may perhaps be estimated by those who, having no confidential clerk
"behind their hand," are compelled to sort out every private document as they
want it, and to spend valuable minutes in turning over old letters and
upsetting everything in their office to find one solitary account. 
By Beryl's aid not a moment was unprofitable, not an hour needed to be employed
without a return of some kind. If she could do nothing to make money she at
least prevented her husband losing time, which to him was money, and knowing
she was usefully occupied, the young wife felt no weariness, she rather liked
the eternal job of tidying and making straight than otherwise. 
Until one day, one sorrowful, mournful day arrived, after which Beryl hated the
sight of papers and letters for ever. 
George was out, he had left her, at her own urgent request, some boxes, tin
boxes, the contents whereof required arrangement. She told him she wanted
"amusement," and for "amusement" he told her to sort out all the letters she
could find, and place them according to date and name in a certain cupboard,
fitted up with alphabetical pigeon-holes which the busy accountant had recently
had put up, in one corner of his own personal and especial first-floor office. 
"Then I am not to (generic mark) the names on the back of any of them?" inquired Beryl. 
"No; you had better range them alphabetically on the table, and then put them
in the pigeon-holes according to date. And lock the door inside while you are
down here, and take the key up-stairs with you when you are tired of sorting."
With which final injunction George Geith left the office and went out. 
Very patiently Beryl pursued her task, making but little progress, however, for
she found occasionally much trouble in deciphering the signatures, and
altogether she was never rapid in such matters. One cause for which might,
perhaps, be found in the fact that she was so much afraid of making mistakes.
All the heaps had to be re-examined, at least once in five minutes, lest, by
any accident, she had put a B among the O's, or an R amongst the C's. 
A woman playing at business like a child. A good, dear little soul, faithful in
her voluntary labour, industrious in her self-imposed task. Still the same
pretty Beryl, amongst whose hair the sunbeams had glanced in the old days in
Hertford shire. It almost seemed as though the sun knew it was the girl he had
shone on in the far-off country, who now sat a wife in a London office, for he
streamed his rays down into Fen Court, and looked through the windows of the
room she occupied, and turned every lock and tress of Beryl's luxuriant hair to gold. 
Dear, light-hearted, true, loving, hopeful wife, who was never to be
light-hearted more; who was never again to look at the fields, and the woods,
and the trees with eyes unclouded by sorrow; from whose daily life all perfect
faith, all unalloyed happiness, was blotted out that day. 
It was the accountant's most private papers, the reader must remember, that
Beryl was now engaged in arranging; and how happy the present must have been to
him, how completely the past sorrow must have been swept away from his memory,
may be imagined from the fact of his having forgotten, that amongst those
letters of his lonelier existence, there lay one on which he would not have had
his wife's eyes rest for any earthly advantage that could have been offered to him. 
There it lay; tossed in amongst a mass of other epistles, was the letter which
had brought liberty with it to the accountant of Fen Court. 
Years had come and gone since then; he had won, he had lost, he had succeeded
again: he had loved, he had married, he had grown almost young under the
influence of his newly-found happiness. He had forgotten the old skeleton, and
behold! here were the dry, dead bones clothed with vitality, with the power of
making the living wretched, lying ready to Beryl's hand. 
"The Rev. George Geith." It was this first aroused her curiosity. The Rev.
George Geith; did that mean her husband's father (adolphus geith)? Beryl
wondered, as she pulled the papers out of their envelope, and looked at them,
just as George Geith looked at them that summer night when the reader stood for
the first time in Fen Court, gazing at the graves, listening to the low
rustling of the wind amongst the trees. 
Joy came to him then, sorrow came to Beryl now. She read, and she re-read till
she understood it all; till she comprehended that she had never possessed her
husband's confidence; that the veriest stranger who came into his office knew
as much about his antecedents as his wife. She had given her past, her future,
her present, to him; she had given her heart, her young, fresh, innocent heart,
with its stores of love; with its capacity for endurance; with its hopefulness,
its faith, its trust, its truth, to a man who had never hinted that his life
held a secret he wished to keep from her knowledge. 
Down amongst the letters Beryl buried that secret deep; she thrust it to the
very bottom of the box, and piled the other papers on it. 
Then she arose, and with a mist before her eyes, with a cloud between her and
the sunshine, groped her way to the door, like one blind. 
How she managed to lock the door, and take out the key, and mount the stairs,
and get back into her own room, Beryl never knew; she was only certain that she
had done so, because when she came to her senses again, she found herself lying
on the floor in her bed-chamber with the key in her hand and (Royal the dog) whining beside her. 
Not without difficulty she contrived to stagger to a chair, where she sat, till
the servant (fen court servant), happening to come down-stairs, she told her to
go out and fetch a (beryl's doctor); the first she could meet with. 
"For if this be not death," thought the poor lonely child, as she laid her head
back on the rail of the chair, "it is as like it as anything I can imagine."
Into the smiling valley of her life an avalanche had descended; there was
nothing she looked at now, which bore the same aspect as it had a few hours
previously, and for the first time, Beryl felt that her misery was greater than
she could bear, that the shock had been too much for her, that if help did not
come, and come speedily, she should die.
If George had killed a man, and kept it from her, she could have borne it; if
he had robbed any one and held back the secret, she could have forgiven it; if
he had told her this piece of his past experience, she could have got over it
in time; but to have thought he confided in her, to have loved him, worked for
him, and to be repaid by such a discovery! Beryl grew dizzy as she remembered
it, and passionately and despairingly she mourned that she had ever married,
that she had no strength left to go away and separate herself from him for ever. 
She was not angry, she was hurt; the blow had crushed her heart, and in a dull,
stupid, helpless way she bemoaned her fate, and thought bitterly about the
weary days to come, now that faith and trust were gone. 
She had believed so implicitly, she had loved so devotedly, and now  and now
this was the end of it; she could never believe, nor hope, nor trust again. 
As she arrived at this conclusion she felt something touch her hand. It was (Royal the dog). 
"The only one who loves me in the world," she moaned; "the only one who is faithful to me now."
And she broke out crying: and all hardness, and all despair, melted away as she
wept  as memories of the old happy days rose before her  as doubts concerning
the justice of her own conclusions arose in her mind. 
Blessed tears! when the day of their common trouble came, Beryl thanked God for
having taken all wounded pride, all harsh judgments out of her heart; she
thanked Him that in that hour of bitter trial He had not left her to herself,
nor suffered her love to die out, nor permitted her affections to become
estranged from her husband (george). 
She felt thankful that, though she could not avoid looking at the matter
through a woman's prejudiced eyes, another light had still been thrown upon the
subject which softened every harsh feature of the ugly fact; and that during
the short period in which they two were permitted to tread life's path
together, no shadow stood betwixt them more. 
Her trust might be gone, but her love was strengthened  perfect happiness might
never be dreamed of for the future. But in trouble, in sorrow, in anxiety,
Beryl discovered that true affection is perfected; that affection which does
not last for time alone, but which endures, as poor humanity in its bitterest
extremity fondly hopes, throughout all the countless ages of eternity. 
CHAPTER 43. NOT DEAD 

Slowly and wearily passed the hours of that summer-day, tired of thinking,
tired of crying, tired of the weakness which overmastered her, tired of moving
her aching head back and forward on the pillow, Beryl found at last employment
and consolation in wondering how much longer her husband (george) would remain
away, in counting the minutes likely to elapse before the time of his probable return. 
Whilst he was out of her sight, she could not help doubting him, but she knew
when once she heard his voice and looked in his face, and touched his hand, she
should believe, spite of everything, that he did love her, and would love her till she died. 
He had never seen her ill, how would he bear it? If he could only think how ill
she was, the poor wife felt certain, no business, no profit would keep him from
her side. She wondered how he would take it, what he would say, what the
(beryl's doctor) would tell him, how he would look when he saw her, whether he
would suspect what she had discovered and read. 
Beryl determined that, if she could prevent it, he should never know she had
found the letter, never learn that it was the shock of reading the secret of
his life which had so nearly killed her. For Beryl believed it had nearly
killed her, and she was right. Even as it was, she lay for days within sight of
the "valley of the shadow," and when she came out of the darkness of that land,
when George knew that for a certainty she was to live, and not to die, she
brought back with her to the plains of earth a child (Walter ambrose), whose
birth had almost left George a widower.
Through her long illness, through her tardy convalescence, her husband could
scarcely bring himself to leave her side. 
Did he love her? 
In the lonely night watches, in the weary hours of day, Beryl learnt better
than to doubt a love which, as (I the narrator) have said before, was less
affection than idolatry. 
What if he had kept something back? supposing she had never become acquainted
with that something, would it not have been happier for her? Why should he have
told her? where was the necessity? had he not a right to use his own discretion
in the matter? what good could have been compassed by his repeating that old
sorrowful story to her? what good had the perusal of it brought to her now? So
Beryl, nursing her child, his child (Walter Geith), and looking out into Fen
Court, where the trees were dropping their leaves in the damp autumnal
afternoon, thought and argued with herself, while George, all unconscious of
what was passing through her mind, toiled in the office below, for her and the
son, who was now an additional incentive to labour. 
What a pathos there is in the lives of these hard-working men! How sadly
pathetic is the existence of that person who has no time to bemoan himself, who
has no capability of working on the sympathy of his fellows. 
Knowing what was coming to George Geith; aware of the existence of a shadow
which was stealing onward and onward towards him, (I the narrator) cannot but
pause for a moment and think of his toil, his industry, his disappointments,
his amazing energy, before I go forward to the end. 
He never pitied himself; he never cried out because his labour was severe,
because the recompense was tardy. Had he staid in the Church he would have
thought more of writing one poor sermon a week than he did now of all the
mental work he went through in a day. Though he had stuck to business till his
mind refused to help him longer, he had never talked about his head, as one may
hear, to the present day, any clergyman in a small country parish raving about
his poor weak brains. There is a cant which comes sooner or later to all
professions; when it comes to business, business will have grown
self-conscious, and as uninteresting and wearisome to outsiders, as over-worked
lawyers and debilitated clergymen are now. 
It is the sublime self-abnegation of business, the utter absence of anything
subjective in its votaries, the complete forget fulness of all physical laws,
the ever-present remembrance of a stern necessity, which invests the poorest
tradesman who wearily treads the London pavements with a pathetic halo, with a human interest. 
Am (I the narrator) tedious? If so, it is because I am loth to proceed with my
story, because I am sorry to tell of the news which Mr Tettin brought ere long
to the office in Fen Court. 
"I have called to give you a piece of, I fear, rather unpleasant information,"
said the lawyer, seating himself by the blazing fire, and keeping his face
turned steadily away from George Geith as he spoke. "Snareham is in the market."
"I saw the preliminary advertisement in the Times yesterday," was the reply,
and George Geith looked inquiringly at the lawyer. 
"You can do nothing, you know," remarked the latter. 
"I am aware of that," answered the other, and there ensued an awkward pause,
which Mr Tettin broke by stating, "that he had lately met, strangely enough,
with a person whose name possessed some little interest for Mr Geith  Mr Clayfield." 
"Clayfield  do you mean the honourable and reverend and so on gentleman with
whom we had that agreeable correspondence some years back?" and George came
close up to the fire and looked anxiously in Mr Tettin's face. 
"The same; and now I am going to tell you a very curious and extraordinary
thing: Mr Clayfield never wrote those letters we received."
"You don't mean it, Mr Tettin?"
"But I do. I had it from his own lips yesterday."
"Good God!" exclaimed the accountant; and he fell back into a chair as if
someone had fired a pistol at him. 
"I thought the sooner you knew this the better," said the lawyer, "and so I
came into the City on purpose to tell you."
No man knew better than George Geith that Mr Tettin would not have announced
this latter fact without some sufficient reason, so he asked: 
"Why could you not have sent for me? why did you come?"
"Well, the fact is," replied Mr Tettin, "and a very singular fact it seems to
me, that about a fortnight ago, a person (mrs geith) called at my office, and
asked my head clerk if he knew your whereabouts. I was out at the time."
"And that person was a woman?" suggested George. 
"That person was a woman," acquiesced Mr Tettin, "and but for her visit I
should most probably never have thought of saying anything to Mr Clayfield
about the matter. The whole affair came round very curiously. I had been
recommended to him by a friend of his (clayfield's friend), and a client of my
own; and after we had been talking over the business which brought him to me
for some time, he pulled out the correspondence that had taken place between
him and the person against whom he wanted me to proceed, and laying it before
me, said, ' My handwriting is not very legible, Mr Tettin, so if you like I
will read it over for you.'"
"Thank you," said I, "but I have managed to read it before, and I can surely read it again."
"Why, where did you ever see it before?" he asked. 
"I saw it when you wrote to the Rev. George Geith."
"The Reverend George Geith," said he; "I never heard of him in my life till this minute."
"Well, Mr Geith," proceeded the lawyer (mr tettin); "I confess that staggered
me; I am not very easily disconcerted, but really any one might have knocked me
over with a feather."
"Did not Mrs Geith die in your parish," I asked; "did you not send first a
letter stating she was dying; secondly, a telegraphic message, announcing her
death; and thirdly, a certificate of her death and burial, to the Rev. George
Geith, care of the person who now addresses you?"
"Certainly not," said Mr Clayfield. "I tell you I never heard of (Mr Geith) or
Mrs Geith till this moment, and' I never heard of you, Mr Tettin, till my
friend mentioned your name to me about a fortnight since."
"After that, Mr Geith, I was very rude, and ran the risk of losing a good
client, for I told him I could not believe that he was Mr Clayfield at all; and
I could not believe it; and I did not believe it, till he took me to an old
acquaintance of my own, who assured me he was the Honourable Ferdinand
Clayfield, and no other person."
"And what conclusion do you draw from all this?" asked George slowly. "That Mrs
Geith is living, and that if you are not remark ably fortunate, you will have
the felicity of seeing her some day when you least look for her."
For a moment the accountant sat silent, but he said "Mr Tettin, do you know I have married again?"
"Whew  ew  ew!" exclaimed the lawyer, and he rose in his dismay, and stood with
his back to the fire, with his hands under his coat tails. 
"It was natural I should marry again some time or other," observed George, angrily. 
"Natural," acquiesced Mr Tettin, "but unfortunate."
"As it has turned out," said the accountant; "but how the devil could I tell
those letters were forgeries? how, in the name of hell, was I to know that she
demon had concocted such a plot?"
"Now, now, my good sir," expostulated Mr Tettin. 
"What would you have?" demanded the accountant, fiercely; "with every hope of
my future life wrecked, with not merely every hope of my own, but of hers
(beryl), of hers, do you expect me to stop and weigh my words, to measure my sentences?"
"After all, however, she (mrs geith) may not be living?" suggested the lawyer. 
"May not!" repeated George, incredulously. "If she be not, who was it then that
called at your office? No, Mr Tettin, she will turn up; sooner or later, she and I will meet."
"Your name," remarked Mr Tettin, "is now in the 'Post- Office Directory.'"
"Yes, knowing no fear, I have thrown aside all concealment; if she (mrs geith)
should go to you again, Mr Tettin, ascertain her terms; I will pay anything, I
will do anything to keep this from the knowledge of my wife, of Beryl."
"You will not tell her, then?"
"Tell her! could I break her heart? could I kill her? could I see her face
change and change as it would change?" and George at this point walked to the
window anxious to conceal an agitation which he was not willing for the lawyer to witness. 
"You remember," said Mr Tettin, as he rose to go, "that at the time we received
these communications from Mr Clayfield, I advised you to run down into
Cornwall; I certainly did not consider such a proceeding indispensable, but I
suggested it might be satisfactory."
"Well," said George, as Mr Tettin paused, "have you come now to remind a fool of his folly?"
"No," was the answer, "I only mention that, because it may perhaps plead my
excuse for offering you a piece of disagreeable counsel now. Tell your  your
present wife (beryl) the whole of the circumstances, and separate."
"I cannot do it," was the reply, faintly uttered. "Tell me to kill myself, and
I may think of it, but whilst I have life I cannot leave Beryl."
"Then may God help you both!" said the lawyer, and he took George's hand and
held it in his own for a moment ere he proceeded. 
"I have never had anything to do with divorce cases, but I think, I believe
there are circumstances connected with this wretched affair which would enable
you to obtain your freedom still."
"For heaven's sake," entreated George, "have mercy; make any compromise, give
her any money, only let the matter be kept quiet. It would kill her," and he
pointed upwards, "to know it; and moreover, Mr Tettin, we have a son (walter geith)."
If the lawyer had said what was in his mind at the moment, he would have
remarked, "of course," for it was quite in the usual routine of his experience
to find that where sons were wanted they did not come, and that where they were
de trop, they arrived in the natural order of events. 
Certainly the son complicated matters, but in spite of this, Mr Tettin stuck to
his text. He advised George to tell his wife (beryl), and to strive for a divorce. 
"And supposing I could not get one?" asked the accountant. 
"I can more easily suppose that you could get one, than that you would continue
to live with your present wife (beryl), knowing your former one (mrs geith) to
be still alive," replied Mr Tettin.
"I have no proof I have no certainty," said the unhappy man (george); "and if I
had proof if I had certainty, still I would keep the knowledge at all hazards
from her. So long as the sorrrow and the suffering can be borne by me alone, I
am comparatively indifferent to it, but she must not know, and if I can help it
she shall never know."
After that explicit statement, what could Mr Tettin do, but leave Fen Court,
greatly marvelling at the perversity of human nature in general, and the nature
of lawyers' clients in particular?
CHAPTER 44. THE TWO BARONETS. 

Whilst the events recorded in the last few chapters were occurring in Fen
Court, Sir Mark Geith had been rapidly treading the shortest road to ruin. 
Some efforts he had made since we last saw him to retrieve his position; but
they were such poor, feeble, purposeless efforts, that day by day Snareham
became involved more and more hopelessly, while the inevitable end  the end his
cousin (george geith) had prophesied so long before  came nearer and nearer. 
Living on the continent, Sir Mark had before proved to be little, if at all,
cheaper than living in England. 
Supposing a man able to leave his tastes and his extravagances behind him in
his native country, there may be some sense in his going abroad to retrench;
but if he carry every usual expense with him, if the same habits that have made
him a pauper at home are kind enough to take passage with him across the
Channel, the result becomes, in the one case as in the other, a mere question
of time; and milor at Paris, at Rome, or the German baths, is as certain to
parcel his family estate out to the dogs, as milor residing in princely style
at his country seat, or at his town mansion in one of the London squares. 
Money is easily spent all the world over, as easily spent as it is hardly
earned; and Sir Mark Geith, who had never earned a sovereign in his life,
unless it might be on a horse-race, or at a gaming-house, discovered in due
course that Snareham must go; that if he did not sell it for himself his
creditors (mark's creditors) would do so for him. 
Whether he could ever have managed to go through the ceremony of pushing the
family estate with his own hand under the auctioneer's hammer, had Lady Geith
held out a finger to help him in his distress, is doubtful; but having
discovered that assistance from her was not to be obtained by any legitimate
means, the baronet one day started off in a passion for England, and forthwith
gave instructions to his (mark's solicitor) solicitor to insert that
advertisement in The Times to which Mr Tettin referred in his interview with
the next of kin (george). 
"And if that do not bring her ladyship to book," said Sir Mark, as he folded up
The Times and directed it to his mother, "nothing will."
Having arrived at which conclusion, he awaited the result, which did not prove
exactly what he had anticipated. 
Although it was the dead of winter, Lady Geith came direct to London, and
discovering on her arrival there that Sir Mark and his wife (cissy hayles) were
not at Halkin Street, she proceeded without an hour's delay to Snareham Castle,
where the baronet felt and convinced anything rather than pleasure at her unexpected appearance. 
As for the baronet's wife (cissy hayles), she made no secret of her
apprehensions. "I told Mark how it would be," she sobbed, as she stood by the
fire in her own apartment, which she had voluntarily relinquished for the
benefit of Lady Geith. "I said we ought to try and keep Snareham at all
hazards. I am sure I would have made any sacrifice, I would do anything now for
the sake of peace and comfort. I have never known what it was to have a day's
ease of mind since I married; and if Mark had only let me go to you, and tell
you everything at the time George wanted money, I am confident you would never
have allowed us to be in such a strait as we are now."
"George wanted money! when did George want money?" and Lady Geith was a
spectacle worth contemplating as she turned round and asked this question.
"Why, he wanted money at the time that bank failed, at the time he was so ill."
"May the Lord have pity on me!" said Lady Geith, as she buried her face in her
hands, and cried aloud: "Righteous art Thou, O Lord  the judgments of the Lord
are true and righteous altogether;" and she sat murmuring to herself for a
minute or two longer, ere she said, sharply: "Tell Mark to come to me; tell him
I wish to speak to him at once."
"Will you not take some refreshment?" suggested the younger lady (cissy
hayles). "May I not order the-"
"Tell Mark to come to me; I have travelled from Nice to London, and from London
here to see him, and him only; and I will neither eat nor drink, I will neither
take rest nor sleep, till I have told him what I have journeyed all these miles to say."
"I am afraid it is all up, Cissy," remarked the baronet, when he received his
mother (lady geith)'s message; "but, perhaps, after she has rated me well, we
may be better friends than has been the case for years past. At any rate, we
cannot be worse; that is one comfort."
And Sir Mark walked off slowly to the presence-chamber, where he found Lady
Geith standing beside the dressing-table, whilst her companion, Mrs Lennor, sat
looking with a sneer and a frown into the fire. 
Observing her, Sir Mark suggested that what his mother had to say to him could
perhaps be better communicated in private. 
"When you hear what I am in England to tell you," answered Lady Geith, who was
trembling from head to foot, "you will understand that to me it matters nothing
whether my words be spoken in the market-place or in this room. I do not desire
a witness to our conversation, but as Mrs Lennor wishes to be present at it, I
can make no objection to such an arrangement."
"Would it be vain for me to object?" asked the baronet. 
"I think so; but you can put your question to Mrs Lennor herself. It is
optional with her to go or to remain, so far as I am concerned. I may add this
one thing, however," added Lady Geith, hastily, "that she has as good a right
to hear what I am about to say as any person living."
"In virtue of which right I claim leave to remain where I am," said Mrs Lennor, defiantly. 
"You have long come between me and my mother (Lady Geith), madam," observed Sir
Mark, "and it is therefore useless for me to contend against an influence
which, at the same time, I confess I am at a loss to understand."
For a moment Mrs Lennor seemed as though she were about to answer, and to
answer gently; but if she did entertain such a purpose she changed it, and
turned with a look of expectation towards Lady Geith, who said: 
"I have come here, Mark, to tell you a secret, which I once thought to have
carried to my grave with me. You can ask what explanation you like afterwards;
but the simple fact is this: You are not my son; I am not your mother."
"Your Ladyship must be mad," exclaimed Mark, as he grasped the mantelpiece for support. 
"So I had the privilege of remarking to Lady Geith before we left Nice, when
she told me for what purpose she intended coming to England," said Mrs Lennor,
from the depths of the arm-chair she occupied. 
"Mad!" echoed Lady Geith, mournfully; "yes, Mark, there was a time in my life
when I believe I was mad; when that woman (mrs lennor), knowing my weak point,
put the plan into my mind which has made my whole existence wretched. I was mad
when I listened to her, but in my sober senses I have repented night and day ever since."
"Mother- ," and Sir Mark's strong voice grew weak. "Mother, say you are
jesting; say you are punishing me for my folly, for my extravagance; tell me
what you have said is untrue. For the love of Heaven, mother, anything rather
than that I am not your son."
She had never thought of this; never in her own self-pity, in her vain regret,
had she imagined how the tale she told would affect Sir Mark. Knowing always
his true position, she had forgotten that he had never looked upon himself but
as a rightful heir, as a neglected son; and now, when in a moment his ghastly
face and expression of sickly horror told her what a fearful piece of
intelligence her speech had conveyed to him, her anger died out in a moment,
and the keenest remorse sprang to life in its stead. 
"Oh! Mark, forgive me, forgive me;" and Lady Geith, in her abject repentance,
asked pardon of the man whom she had enriched for the sole purpose, as it
seemed, of one day making him a beggar. 
"I do not know what it is I have to forgive," he said, "for I cannot understand
what you mean; I do not comprehend what you have been trying to tell me. If it
be true what you say, if I am not your son, whose son am I? Was George your
child? Am I his brother? Tell me all about it; only for God's sake do not keep
me any longer in suspense."
Thus exhorted, Lady Geith, who had changed in a moment from judge to criminal,
told him everything with which the reader is already acquainted; but she
studiously avoided making any mention of the one point on which Sir Mark was
the most anxious for information. Three or four times he broke across her story
to ask her this; and as often as he asked, she continued her narrative without
heeding his interruption. 
When she had quite finished, Sir Mark said: 
"And now, having heard whose son I am not, I demand to be told whose son I am."
There was a long pause, during the continuance of which Sir Mark looked from
Lady Geith to Mrs Lennor, and from Mrs Lennor back to Lady Geith. 
"Whose son am I?" he asked again. "Will neither of you who devised this cursed
plot open your lips now, to say where you got me? Will you not, at least, tell
me the name of the mother who sold me, and what price you gave her for me?"
"You had better not ask anything further, Mark; you had better rest content."
"Rest content!" he repeated, scoffingly. "Do you think I shall let this matter
stop here? do you imagine for a moment I shall pause now, till I know every in
and out of this iniquitous transaction; till I have cleared myself from all
guilty participation in it? I shall go direct to George; I shall tell him every
sentence you have told me to-night, and I shall leave you to make what
reparation you can in the future for the wrong you have done him in the past."
Having made which speech, he was turning angrily to leave the room, when Mrs
Lennor seized him, and exclaiming: 
"You will never be so crazy as to go to tell him? you will surely never let
what you have heard this night come to his knowledge?" pulled him back into the apartment. 
"Mrs Lennor," answered Sir Mark, "though you have managed Lady Geith's affairs,
I can assure you that you shall not manage mine," and he was making another
attempt to reach the door when Lady Geith's companion again desired him to stop. 
"I command you, sir, to wait and listen to what I have to say."
"And by what right, if I may inquire, do you presume to -command me?" he asked. 
"By the best of all rights," she answered, "for I am your mother. Oh! Mark,"
cried the unhappy woman (mrs lennor), "have you never felt that I was your
mother? is there nothing in your heart which tells you I am speaking the truth now?"
She would have come near him, but he waived her off; she would have clung to
him, but he threw her hand away from him; she would have pleaded for mercy and
forgiveness, but Mark turned a deaf ear to her words; he would listen to
nothing she had to say; he would put no questions save these: "Who was my
father? whose child was Lettice? and to both Lady Geith replied  Lady Geith who
could not find it in her heart to tell him everything  "your father was Captain
Lennor, you and Lettice were brother and sister."
"You and Lettice were not brother and sister," broke out Mrs Lennor; "your
father was not Captain Lennor. As you have said so much, my lady, I will say
more; as you have -chosen to tell the secret we both swore should never pass
our lips; as, to serve your own purposes, you have thrust my son from the place
where, of your own free will, you put him, I will tell you something you might
have guessed long ago if you would. You were not," she added, turning to Sir
Mark, "the son of myself and Captain Lennor, as Lady Geith believed, but you
were the son of Sir Mark Geith, and he knew who was your mother, and aided the
deception for his own sake. Now, my lady, that you have ousted my son from his
home and his title, which of us has the worst of it, you or I? the wife or the mother, which?"
But Lady Geith could not answer, she was lying like one dead in Mark's arms.
She had risen to reply to the taunt of the woman (mrs lennor) who had made her
life, married and widowed, a weariness to her, but before she could open her
lips she had fallen forward on Mark's shoulder, with the blood gurgling from
her mouth, with her grey hair hanging about her old and haggard face. 
That face had been lovely once; that hair had been black as night, glossy as a
raven's wing, in the days when she was neglected for the sake, as she knew now,
of Mark's mother, for the love of as mean, as low, and as designing a woman as ever breathed. 
All these years she had believed the story which her companion (mrs lennor) had
first told her; had believed the tale of Mrs Lennor's too confiding fondness
for her future husband (captain lennor); had refused to credit the evidences of
her own senses, which might have told her Mark's likeness to the late baronet
(the late sir mark) was something more than accidental; and now she lay in the
arms of the son of the woman who had deluded her; lay there stricken down, by
the base treachery, by the abominable ingratitude, of the woman in whom she had trusted. 
That woman would now have come forward to help her, but Sir Mark put her sternly aside. 
"Leave Lady Geith to me," he said; "or if you would do her a kindness, send my
wife (cissy hayles) here."
"You will not tell her, Mark," implored Mrs Lennor; "you will not tell her."
"Send my wife here," repeated the baronet; "send her here at once."
And as he spoke he laid his hand on the bell, and rang it for assistance. 
"Tell one of the men to saddle a horse, and ride over for (the great london
doctor) directly. Tell another to be ready to start for the station; I shall
want to telegraph to town." And Sir Mark lifted Lady Geith gently, I might
almost say lovingly, and carrying her into the next room, laid her on the bed.
All that night Lady Geith lay between life and death. All that night Sir Mark
Geith and his wife watched beside her. 
Before morning, Cissy knew everything; knew her husband had no claim either to
title or estate; that the man she had loved (george geith) was the rightful
owner of Snareham; knew her daughters were portionless, she and Mark penniless;
but still she watched on till morning came, till they began to look for the
great London doctor, who said, on his arrival, that Lady Geith required nothing
but quietness and nourishment. "With these," finished the medical magnate,
"there is nothing to apprehend." Having made which agreeable statement, the
autocrat pocketed his fee, and was driven to the station in triumph. 
Meantime Sir Mark Geith adhered to his first determination. He would have
nothing to do with his mother (mrs lennor); he would see George Geith as soon
as might be; in accordance with which resolves, he next morning despatched Mrs
Lennor bag and baggage to the Halkin Street mansion, while he himself started
by an afternoon train for London. 
Arrived there he took up his quarters at the Guildhall Coffee house, in the
City, and walked thence to Fen Court, where, late though the hour was, he
expected to find his cousin. 
He had not heard of his marriage; he was not aware he lived on the premises,
but he knew George worked hard, and thought he should see him accordingly. 
When he reached Fen Court, all the offices were closed, and, but for a light in
the accountant's old office, Mark would have fancied that he was away too. As
it was, he rang the bell and asked the girl (fen court servant), who appeared
in answer to his summons, if he could see Mr Geith. 
"Will you walk in," said the (fen court servant), and she left him standing in
the clerk's office, while she ran up-stairs to tell her master (george geith). 
Directly afterwards George appeared, and took the visitor into his own especial
sanctum, where he lit the gas, and pushed a chair for his cousin (mark geith)
close beside the fire which blazed cheerily and cozily on the hearth.
 "You do not reproach me, then, George," said the baronet, when the other took
a seat opposite to him; "you do not reproach me, then? "
"Reproach you," answered George, "why should I? It is only natural that I
should feel sorry; but Snareham was your own to do what you liked with, and you
have done what you liked with it. There is an end of the matter."
"No, George; you mistake. There is not an end of the matter, for Snareham was
not mine to do what I liked with, and I have come to tell you this."
"Not yours?" and George looked at his cousin inquiringly. "Not yours; Mark, you are dreaming."
"I wish I was, George. I wish I was. Look here, old fellow, Snareham belongs to
you, what is left of it, and the title is yours, and I am nothing but a beggar,
and an intruder, and a swindler."
"What the devil do you mean, man?" asked the accountant. "Hold up your
head"(which latter appendage Mark was leaning against the chimney -piece), "and
tell me what has happened, in plain English, instead of in riddles, if you can."
Thus entreated, Mark began his story. He told every particular which he knew
himself, and he concluded by requesting his cousin to come down to Snareham,
and turn him and his out of it. "I will withdraw the advertisements. I will go
to the diggings, and resign everything," said Sir Mark, piteously, as though he
expected his cousin to handcuff him forthwith, and take him off to prison.
 For full ten minutes the accountant sat thinking in silence over the singular
revelation just made to him; but, at the expiration of that time, he answered:
"So far as the world is concerned, you can remain what you are to the end of
the chapter. To me your title would be useless, or worse than useless. Keep it
if you like, and welcome."
"You are too generous, George, too good, too considerate," and the baronet
really felt that his cousin was the noblest fellow in creation as he spoke. 
"Generous , am I?" repeated the accountant with a smile, a mournful, despairing
smile. "Come up-stairs with me and see if I am not as fortunate as I am generous; come."
Greatly marvelling, his cousin followed him into his old office, now a
sitting-room, where he was duly introduced to (Mrs. Beryl Geith), who at her
husband's desire made tea immediately for Sir Mark. 
"I had no idea you were married, George," said the baronet, when Beryl left the
room for a moment. "Your wife is a charming creature; you are indeed fortunate."
"I know you will say so when I tell you everything," replied George, drily. "We
have one child, too, perhaps you would like to see him."
"But he is asleep, George, fast asleep," remonstrated Beryl, when her husband
presently begged her to bring in the baby (Walter Geith). "If I wake him he
will cry, and you know how you grumble when he does cry."
Which George did know perfectly well, and so he guiltily gave up the point and
contented himself with remarking that Mark could take a look at the new comer in his cradle. 
"What have you called him?" asked Sir Mark. 
"Walter Ambrose," answered his cousin, and the pair looked at one another. 
"It is many a long day since there was a Walter in the Geith family before,"
remarked the baronet, significantly. 
"And it may be many a long day before there will be Walter again," thought the
accountant, but he held his peace, and travelled back in memory to that night
when he had last stood in the picture-gallery at Snareham, looking at the
portrait of the Puritan soldier. 
"You have seen my wife now, and you have seen my son (walter ambrose)," said
George Geith, as he and his cousin walked along Fenchurch Street to the
Guildhall Hotel; "and no doubt you think what you say, that I am a very
generous individual for letting you keep what can be of no possible use to
myself. Whatever else you may be, Mark, you are still apparently my cousin, and
I wonder whether, if I tell you something which is breaking my heart, you will
keep my secret for the sake of the days when we were boys together."
"I will keep it, I will be true to you; if only because of the great wrong that
I have done to you, I will be faithful to you now."
"Thank you," said George, and he thought for a moment, ere he proceeded. "With
regard to what you have told me tonight, it is impossible for me to say how I
should act were I situated differently. Under no circumstances, however, I
think, should I make any move in the matter; but as it is, I can do nothing for
this reason  Beryl is not legally my wife, and my child (walter ambrose) is
consequently illegitimate. A fortnight since there was not a happier man in the
kingdom than myself; but I did not know then that a woman was living (mrs
geith) who has cursed my whole life."
"Tell me, if you can, how it all came about," said Sir Mark, compassionately;
"tell me if you like, if you think it would be any relief to you, if you think
I can help you in the matter  can I help you, George?" and the baronet, as we
must continue to call him, laid his hand on his cousin's shoulder as he spoke. 
"I think so, or I should scarcely have taken you into my confidence," said the
accountant. "Years and years ago, Mark, before ever I took orders, before I
left college, I met with this woman (mrs geith); I was young then, and I was
foolish, and I suppose I thought I was in love with her; of one thing, however,
I am confident, which is, that I never intended to marry her; more shame for
me, perhaps, but it is the truth. However, to make an end of this part of my
story, I did marry her, and when I could afford to take her to a home of my
own, I meant to do so. Though it was not long before I found out what a bad
bargain I had made of it, though she was my inferior in every respect, and
older than I in addition, still I fully intended doing my duty to her. Mark,
you will try and believe that?"
"I do believe every word you have told me," said the other earnestly, "and I
believe more, I think you were duped somehow, and that you were taken in by some designing woman."
"That is quite true," answered George, "but hear me further. We had not been
married a fortnight before I found she (mrs geith) was false to me, before I
discovered that a fellow whom I had believed to be my friend, and who had urged
and egged me on to marry her, should have been her husband instead of me. If I
had caught him then, I would have killed him; if the pair had not disappeared
together, I would have had the life of one if not both, though I had swung for
it. As I said, however, they disappeared, and I fell back into my old life,
hoping I should never hear more of either. In due time I took orders, I went to
Morelands; I had been wild, but I steadied down and began to see that a
character for respectability would be of value to me in my way through the
world. I meant to save money and get rid some day of the ties that bound me. I
did not greatly like a curate's life, but still being a curate, with the Great
Snareham tithes in prospective, did not seem a bad provision for an almost
penniless man. I had nearly forgotten my boyish misadventure, as nearly as a
man can ever forget anything of the kind, when suddenly she reappeared. She
came to me half drunk; she came into my sitting-room, accompanied by her father
(mrs geith's father), who was still more tipsy than herself, and insisted that
I should receive her as my wife, that I should introduce her to my friends."
Not all the years that had come and gone since then had been able to efface
from George Geith's mind the shame and horror of that night; and he paused for
a moment ere he proceeded, as though striving to recover his composure before
he went on with his story. 
"It was money they wanted, Mark  money, of course, and nothing else; and before
I could get rid of them they had swept away almost every sixpence of the sum I
had put aside so hardly and at such a sacrifice, to effect at some future day
my complete emancipation. 
"What was I to do? I put it to you, Mark, what could I do but what I did do,
namely, leave Morelands, and relinquish the Church, and come to London to seek my fortune."
"You might have come to us," said the baronet, reproachfully; "we could surely
have helped you, and we would."
"At that time," answered his cousin, "I considered my promise to my mother
(Rose Stanhope) bound me completely. At that time, also," he added, "I would
have done anything rather than confessed my folly. When men are young, Mark,
they think it looks more manly for them to be villains than dupes. I would have
been the former had I not been the latter. Being the latter, the shame and the
fear of ridicule completely overmastered me. If I had to do the same thing
again I am still not sure that I could stay to face the consequences of my own acts."
Walking leisurely, the pair had by this time reached Lothbury, and George now
proposed that, instead of proceeding direct to the Guildhall Coffee-house, they
should go up Moorgate Street, and take a turn round Finsbury Circus. 
"I cannot talk in the house," said the accountant, lifting his hat at the
moment, and letting the cool night air fan his fore head; "I cannot talk in the
house; and, besides, there is something in the intense quietness of these
out-of-way corners of London that soothes and calms me more than words could
express. When I first came to London, after I had been driven mad all day by
the noise, and the tumult, and the din, I used to go out for an hour or so
after it was quite dark, and wander through the hundred-and-one squares that
lie between Gray's Inn Lane and Tottenham Court Road. I lodged in Guilford
Street then, and I think, to this hour, I could find my way about that part of London blindfold."
"You must have found it horribly lonely, I should imagine,' observed Sir Mark,
who had by this time lit another cigar. 
"I know now I was lonely," answered his cousin, "but I did not feel lonely
then. In the day-time I had not time to think; at night I was glad of the
stillness and the solitude. I like the City, however, better than any part of
London. Its life is so much more active, its repose so much greater. Where, at
the West-End, Mark, would you meet with such perfect loneliness as this?" and
the accountant paused, as he concluded, in order to let Sir Mark hear that no
footsteps, save their own, woke the echoes of the deserted pavements. 
"What did you propose to yourself to do when you came first to London?" asked
the baronet. "Anything," was the answer, "anything by means of which I could
earn my bread and save enough ultimately to secure my release from her (mrs
geith). How I managed to both earn and save, I could scarcely tell you, Mark;
but I did both. A man must make money before he can lose it."
"You deserved better," said his cousin (mark geith), "after all those years of
toil. How did you find out that  that  woman (mrs geith) is still alive; or
rather, first tell me what made you think she was dead?"
"That is Moorfields," remarked George, a little irrelevantly, as they passed
the Roman Catholic chapel; and he took his cigar out of his mouth, and knocked
the ash off, ere he proceeded. 
"I thought she (mrs geith) was dead, because I had a letter to that effect from
a clergyman in the country; and I know she is not dead, because the solicitor
who acted for me in the matter (mr tettin), has lately seen that clergyman, who
states he never wrote to me in his life, and that the letters sent to me were forgeries."
"What was her object? "asked Sir Mark. 
"I do not know," answered the accountant. "She (mrs geith) may either have
thought she would obtain a clue to my whereabouts, or she may have desired to
get rid of me. I cannot make out what her motive was; but of course she had
some motive. Now it appears she is looking after me again, for she has been to
Mr Tettin's office, asking for my address."
"You remind me of something," said the baronet. "Whilst we were abroad, the
(Snareham housekeeper) told Cissy, some person (Mrs. Geith) had been at the
castle asking her if she could tell her where you were, and if you were often
at Snareham. The old lady (Snareham Housekeeper), who is, as you may remember,
mighty particular, did not like the woman's looks, and gave her no
encouragement to come back again. She did you a good turn, however, for she
said she had only seen you once in the last dozen years; and that was when you
came home from some country further away than India. You remember saying
something about having been in a stranger place than India that time you came
to see me at Snareham?"
"I recollect saying something about it," answered George, who was all attention. 
"'Then,' asked the woman (Mrs Geith),'is he in England?' 
"'I am sure I don't know,' said the old lady (Snareham Housekeeper); 'Mr
George's affairs is not my business, and they are not yours for that matter
either. I cannot say where Mr George is; but I should think he had gone abroad again.'
"'Do the family never hear from him?'
"'I do not read my lady's letters, nor Sir Mark's either,' was all the answer
madam (Mrs Geith) got; and it seems she went away very greatly dissatisfied. I
intended to write and tell you all about this, but other things put it out of
my mind. I suppose there can be no doubt now who it was?"
"Not the least; and that brings me now, Mark, to what I wanted to ask you. Will
you keep my whereabouts a secret if you can? Beyond all things, will you be
silent about my being in business? If we can gain time; if I can manage to move
my office, and start as I did before, with a false name, putting myself as Co.;
beyond all things, if we can bribe her (mrs geith) to quietness, I may still be
able to keep the affair from Beryl's knowledge; and if I can do that, I care for nothing else."
"I will go up to Halkin Street first thing in the morning, and warn the people
there," said Sir Mark, eagerly, "and I will send down a special messenger to
Cissy, telling her what to do at Snareham. Is there anything else I can do for
you? Shall I ask Mr Tettin to send her to me should she call on him again.
Shall I tell her you are in India, China, Russia? I will swear black is white,
George, if you say the word."
"I think, Mark, it will be better to leave Mr Tettin to manage her," answered
George; "at present she thinks I want the matter kept from the knowledge of my
family; if once she suspects you all know about it she will begin to wonder why
I am willing to buy her silence. Leave her to Mr Tettin. I fancy he will be able to deal with her."
"Heaven send he may!" exclaimed Mark, devoutly. "Will you not come in?" he
added, for by this time they had left the Circus and paced slowly along London
Wall, and got from thence to King Street via Basinghall and Gresham Streets.
"Will you not come in? No; well, it is late, and I cannot press you, for I
suppose that pretty wife of yours (beryl) will be getting uneasy if you stop
longer. Good-bye. I will call with you in the morning, after I come back from Halkin Street."
And Sir Mark fully intended to fulfil this promise, but the next day he did not
call to see George, he only wrote him a note, stating that he had gone to
Halkin Street; that he had spoken to the servants there (lady geith's
servants); that the butler (Corby) had forthwith informed him a woman had
called the previous evening, asking to see Lady Geith; that on being told her
ladyship was at Snareham, she inquired whether any of them (the servants) could
give her the address of their master's cousin, Mr George Geith; that as she did
not look very respectable, he (the butler Corby) had hesitated to mention the
matter to Mrs Lennor, but the person was so pressing, and said her business was
so important, that he finally took her message up-stairs, whereupon Mrs Lennor
said she did not know Mr Geith's address herself, but that as he was in some
business in the City, no doubt his name could be found in the "Directory."
"In plain English," exclaimed Sir Mark, "she gave you a sovereign, I suppose,
to carry her message, and get her the information she wanted?"
"It was not my fault, Sir Mark, it was not, indeed," pleaded the man (corby);
"she said it was most important, of great consequence to Mr Geith, that she
should see him at once. And Mrs Lennor -"
"D- Mrs Lennor," broke out the baronet, and he straight way left the house. 

CHAPTER 45. THE OLD SKELETON.

In the life-stream of every man there comes a point where the waters flow more
rapidly onward, where many currents meeting produce not merely eddies and
swells, and turbulence and disorder, but also widen and deepen the river of
existence, and cause it to proceed on its course to the great sea, with
increased swiftness, with a fiercer rush. 
At such a point George Geith had now arrived, and the din of many rushing
waters, of many coming events, confused and deafened him. 
Mechanically he went about his daily work, about the work that had so lately
been to him the sole employment of his life; but his heart and his mind were
not in his office. They were at Snareham, at the Guildhall Coffeehouse, with
the Honble and Rev. Mr Clayfield, and in the future, the dark and uncertain
future, towards which he looked with horror and affright. 
For the second time George Geith was afraid to face his sorrows boldly. As at
Morelands he had fled from the wretched creature with whom he had linked his
lot, so in Fen Court he lacked courage to pursue the only course which
presented even the faintest promise of peace to him and his. All in vain Sir
Mark implored and Mr Tettin counselled; all in vain Mr Clayfield offered his
aid, and promised that the, by no means despicable, influence of his own family
(mr clayfield's family) should be exerted to assist in ridding the unhappy man
of the chains he had rivetted on himself; nothing could move him. 
"He could do anything but break Beryl's heart," he said. "He could pay any
money; undergo any suffering; consent to any sacrifice, rather than let Beryl
know she was not legally his wife, that the child she had borne him was illegitimate."
He had been strong to work, he had been strong to endure; he had been as iron
in times of difficulty, as steel when he met with reverses. But this grief
crushed him, and he let himself drift away with the currents, which he thought
were too powerful for him to struggle against; until, alas! the time for
struggle was past for ever. 
And, indeed, those who urged him the most earnestly to tell Beryl everything,
who knew that a full and perfect confidence now was his only chance of ultimate
salvation, could not but acknowledge his position to be one full of difficulty;
could not say for certain that, had they stood in his place, they would have
evinced greater courage than he. 
No circumstance of humiliation seemed wanting in the whole affair. To have been
entrapped into a marriage with such a woman (mrs geith); to have fled from her,
and paid her for silence, and worked to ensure her silence through years,
rather than confess his folly, was bad enough; but to have been duped by her a
second time; to have married on the faith of forged letters; to have been
gulled in manhood more stupidly even than he had been gulled in youth; to have
eluded his wife's search so successfully that he had driven her, or had
apparently driven her, to gain her living among the outcasts of society, there
was surely enough here to try the courage of the bravest, to conquer the spirit
of the firmest man living. 
Thinking of Beryl's loving faith  of her innocence, her purity, her
spotlessness  thinking of the stain he, who would have laid down his life for
her, had put on her fair name   thinking of the one woman who was really his
wife (mrs geith), of the other woman from whom anybody might now separate him,
George Geith turned coward, and refused to battle with his misery. 
He would die sooner than let Beryl know on what a poor broken reed she had
leaned, when she elected to trust her happiness into his keeping. He would do
anything rather than drag his poor darling's name through the mire with which
his wife (mrs geith) had dedaubed herself and her husband (george geith). He
could not, he would not, run the risk of having to separate himself from Beryl.
He would not have her even mentioned in the divorce courts. He would not have
the faintest breath of gossip pass over her fair fame. He would give money; he
would work; he would wait; he would keep his skeleton concealed at all hazards, at any price. 
In a strait like this, what was man to say to man? what could even the best and
kindest do, save leave him alone with his misery in the hands of God? Advice
was but torture; worldly counsel but mockery; whilst his friends, if they at
tempted to take higher ground, if they began arguing on the broader principles
of right and wrong, the weary sufferer grew impatient, and told them what they
knew to be true, that there are cases in which no mortal being can decide what
is right and what is wrong, and that his was one of these. 
"Help me to compromise it," he said, "help me to get her out of the country, or
show me how I can leave England and take Beryl with me, and I will thank you
with all my soul. As for the sin, if it be a sin, I will settle that with my
Maker when he calls me to account. He knows my extremity, and will have mercy accordingly."
If this view of the matter were not orthodox, it was at any rate natural; it
was so natural, indeed, that Mr Clayfield stopped Mr Tettin in the commencement
of an excellent sermon, and said very earnestly: "We will leave you then in His
hands, for we are not judges. He can make darkness light, and a crooked path
straight. He can turn sorrow into joy, and bring forth good out of evil. My
poor friend," and the clergyman laid his hand kindly on George's shoulder, "I
pray that in His infinite mercy He may do all this for you, and that He may
open a way for you out of your present trouble, which we in our blindness cannot discern."
It was well to be tender and pitiful; it was best if any error were made it was
made on the side of Christian charity, of brotherly love; for everything was so
dark to George Geith in those days of doubt and suffering, that he needed the
gentlest handling, the most forbearing consideration. 
As for Mark, he was willing to do whatever his cousin asked him. "I mean," said
the baronet, "to obtain every possible particular about her former life."
"You can do so if you like," replied George wearily, "but I am sure it is merely waste of time."
"Still it would be a satisfaction," persisted Sir Mark. 
Meantime Mrs George Geith was not idle either; having once got on the scent,
she soon discovered that George lived in Fen Court, City. 
"So!" exclaimed George's skeleton, and she went straight to her husband's office. 
That interview sealed George's fate. She soon found out his weak point; she
played upon his fears; she tortured him; she taunted him; she got money from
him; she laid him down in his misery and trampled over him. She had the best of
it; from that day out he was slave, she mistress. 
With the treachery of a very Judas she induced him to believe money could keep
her quiet. With a refinement of cruelty she made him work for her, toil for
her, borrow for her, buy for her. She took handsome apartments, she fed
sumptuously every day, she clothed herself in purple and fine linen, and. then
drove in her carriage to the City, and took money from this poor, proud man,
whose one weak point, his love for Beryl, was a tower of strength to her. 
To all things, however, there comes an end, and accordingly there came a day to
George Geith, when, seeing all his aunt (lady geith)'s money and all he could
make in business, would not satisfy this daughter of the horse-leech, he told
her they must come to some understanding, that she must fix some price and keep to it. 
Handsome apartments, fine equipage, purple, and fine linen, living sumptuously
every day, had been things greatly to the liking of Mrs George Geith; but when
she found that there was to be an end to all of them, when she discovered that
a small certain income was meant to take the place of a banker who honoured her
cheques ad lib., the wretched woman reverted to her own original plan, and
resolved, now she had got all the money she could, to take what she called her "revenge."
For which purpose, watching her opportunity, she called on Beryl, and told her
all  told her she was no wife; that her child (Walter ambrose) was no better
than the brat left at the door-step of some wealthy man by the poorest and lowest cast-away. 
"He has refused to buy my silence longer," she said, transgressing in her
passion all bounds of prudence; "and he fancies that I will sit down tamely and
see another woman usurp my place. He thought I would hold my tongue, that you
would never know, that you would never prosecute him for bigamy."
In a moment Beryl saw her advantage. Like a tiger rushing to protect her young,
so she sprang forward to protect her husband (george). 
"Prosecute him for bigamy," she repeated; "who is to do that?"
"Why, you or your friends, to be sure," retorted Mr George Geith's first choice. 
"A man cannot be prosecuted for bigamy unless he have married two wives," said
Beryl, turning her face flushed with sudden determination towards her enemy. 
"No, but he has married two wives," answered Mrs George Geith, triumphantly. 
"How do you know that? "and Beryl looked straight at the woman she questioned. 
"How do I know that?" repeated Mrs George Geith. "Because he has."
"How do you know he has?" persisted Beryl. 
Oh, these women! what will they not do, what will they not think of? when the
happiness of the man they love is at stake. Had it come new to her, Beryl might
have hesitated, had she not been prepared she might have faltered, but warned
by that letter, she had been strengthened; a watchful observer during the last
few months, she had suspected, and now she turned her strength and her
suspicion into weapons for her husband's defence. She would not acknowledge she
was married to him; not all her visitor's artifices should wring that from her.
And thus when the other tried to shame her into a confession, when she inquired
how she could live with him, knowing she was not his wife, Beryl, with the
blood seeming to stand still about her heart, answered: "What is that to you?
for what I have done, for what I shall do, I am not answerable to any mortal upon earth."
"If it be true what you say," answered the lawful wife (mrs geith), "if you are
really not married to him, he has then been more careful for you than you are for yourself."
"He need not have been," Beryl replied; "there is nobody now living whose heart
it could break, to know that I am living with George Geith without being his wife."
"I cannot believe it," said the other, "I do not credit what you tell me; you
are doing this to screen him. He would never have been thoughtful and careful
for you if he had not deceived you first."
"Do I look like a woman who has been deceived?" and Beryl rose and fronted her
enemy (mrs geith), "do I look like a betrayed and injured wife? Did I receive
your news as news? Was I hurt? Was I astonished? What have I said or done to
make you think I am anything else than what I tell you, a woman, who having
loved George Geith better than anything else on earth  better than you, though
you are his wife, ever loved him  means to stay with him to the end?" 
Beryl's visitor looked round the room; she glanced out at the churchyard, she
took an inventory of the furniture, she appraised the value of Beryl's dress,
she scrutinized every feature in her face, before she said slowly, and not
without a certain reluctant admiration: 
"I believe you have loved him. I believe you do. If it were otherwise you could
not sacrifice yourself for his sake as you are doing now."
"I am not sacrificing myself," Beryl persisted. "It is George who has sacrificed himself for me."
"Till very lately he believed me dead," said Mrs George Geith. 
"What of that," retorted Beryl; "it is not necessary for a man to marry another
wife, because he thinks his first one dead. Do you not consider it the most
natural thing in the world for a man to consider he had enough of matrimony
when he tried it with you? If you do not, I do;" and Beryl, growing desperate
in her efforts at persuasion, became personal, not to say insulting in her remarks.
All the less for that, perhaps, did Mrs Geith believe her; but certainly,
Beryl's statement, whether that statement were true or false, placed her in a
dilemma. If George and Beryl were not man and wife, then the last shot, which
she had held back for her direst extremity, would turn out to be but blank
cartridge; even if they had been married, and that this girl, this woman, this
wife, whatever she might be called, refused to prosecute? Truly Mrs George
Geith began to think her husband had proved almost too easy a prey; that he
must have been a desperately timid pigeon to submit to her plucking without
making even an effort to fly away. 
CHAPTER 46. TWO MOST WRETCHED 

Many a one who can bear up bravely enough during the wildest storm, who can
face the rain and the wind, will yet break down after the tempest has passed;
but such was not the case with Beryl. For so long a time she had felt the
clouds gathering; for so long she had noticed the alteration in her husband;
for so long she had known of the visits of some strange woman (mrs geith) to
him; for so long a time she had been coming slowly, gradually to believe in the
existence of some secret, which secret she connected (by that sure, same
feminine instinct which draws oftentimes more certain and rapid conclusions
than can be adduced from facts by any process of reasoning) with the letter
that had brought such misery to her; for so long she had been waiting,
watching, listening, for what (I the narrator) think Gerald Griffin calls the
footfall of fate, that the appearance of Mrs George Geith proved rather a
confirmation of her fears than a surprise to the poor devoted wife, who
resolved on the instant to save George at any sacrifice to herself.
What were her fears, her happiness, her future, truth itself even, in
comparison to the love she bore him? If she had been angry with him once when
the wrong seemed to lie between him and herself, was not that all the more
reason why she should defend him now, when enemies came up armed against him?
Every thought for herself, every feeling of resentment, was absorbed in pity
for the man, the wretched man, who was struggling to keep her foe and his at
bay. She could understand now why he had never mentioned his first marriage to
her, she comprehended why he had not slept well lately, why his appetite
failed, why his spirits were low, why he had evinced towards her such a
passionate tenderness; why he had been at once so irritable and so loving, so
exacting and so remorseful. 
Did Beryl weep? it was for him; did she devise schemes of release? they were
all for his relief and benefit; did she lie, did the heart which was truth
itself frame falsehoods, did the trembling lips utter deceit? it was for him  all, all for him. 
Her religion was to love this man whom she had chosen, against whom she had
never felt anger and resentment but once, with her whole soul and spirit; to
fight for him, protect him, cling to him through joy and through sorrow, in life and in death. 
All the judges in the land could not have persuaded Beryl she was not his wife;
all the clergymen in the kingdom, all the bishops and archbishops, with the
head of the Church to boot, could not have made her believe she was sinful
because no thought of leaving him ever crossed her mind. 
The greater his distress, the closer it behoved her to cling to him, and she
would love him and cling to him all the more, because this woman had risen up
to try and part them. 
And thus it came to pass that when George was in his direst extremity; when he
was wondering how he should ever be able to satisfy the demands his first wife
was making upon him; when, one day, ill and weary, he paused for a moment to
think what he had best do before going down to see  
"That lady (mrs geith), in the office, sir;" Beryl came suddenly to the rescue. 
Without a faltering tone, she said: "Let me go to her, George. I have seen her;
I know all. We will let her do her worst; only you shall not give her any more
money; you shall not, I say; she has harassed you long enough."
"Let you go to her!" he repeated. "Do you know what you are talking about? have
you any idea of whom it is you are speaking?"
"I am speaking of the woman you thought dead, George. I am talking of your wife (mrs geith)."
And before he could prevent her she eluded his grasp, and ran down the stairs,
and entered his office, and confronted her enemy. 
She bolted the door inside so that he should not follow her, and then she stood
looking at Mrs Geith, and demanding what she wanted. "I want my husband."
"He is ill, you cannot see him; you shall not come here to harass him," and
Beryl stood with both hands clasping the back of the chair while she panted out
the words; "you cannot frighten me," she went on, "and for the future you will
not frighten him. He knows now that I know, and I would die before I would harm
him myself or let you harm him either."
"If he had not married you, why should he care about your knowing?" asked Mrs Geith. 
"What has that to do with you? "answered Beryl, resorting to her former line of
defence; "how often am I to tell you that what I choose to do, or what I choose
to leave undone, is no concern of yours?"
"He married you." To that text Mrs Geith stood resolutely. 
"He did not!" and in the back office, whence he had sent his clerk (mr geith's
most confidential clerk) out on an impromptu errand, George Geith heard every word she uttered. 
"But I say he did."
"And I say he did not."
"It is of no earthly use your holding out in that way about the matter, because
when you are summoned as a witness, you will have to speak the truth," said Mrs
Geith, with rising anger. 
"If you summoned me fifty times I should not appear; and if I did appear I
should only repeat what I have told you," retorted Beryl.
For a moment the two women stood looking at one another; then Mrs Geith,
subduing her anger, said hypocritically, "Have you no friends, my poor child,
who will interfere to protect you? no father's house to which you can go? no
brother to right your wrongs?"
"Wrongs!" repeated Beryl, "what wrongs? Are you trying to get me over to your
side? do you think for a moment I will turn against him? If you are, if you do,
you are wasting your time. It is useless trying to tempt me, you might as well
attempt to make me forsake my child (walter ambrose)."
"Then I will expose you; the world shall know you for what you are; it shall
know that, for all your soft voice, and innocent face, you " 
She knew he was in the other office; she had heard him trying to force the
lock, and before her enemy could finish her cruel sentence, could speak the
words that Beryl felt were coming, she sprang to the door of communication
between the two offices, and crying, "George, stop her; George, you will not
desert me," sought refuge at his side. 
Then over the pair the long pent-up storm burst forth; a storm that brought the
clerks (two new clerks) from their desks, the porters (fen court porters) from
the basements, the (fen court servants) servants from up-stairs, that revealed
to every man, and woman, and child who chose to come and listen, what was the
skeleton that had cursed George Geith's life; what the haunting demon (mrs
geith) that had dogged his footsteps. 
It was over; the shock, the expense, the shame, the disgrace. There was no more
money to be paid for silence; no more dread of Beryl learning the worst. He
could not stand between her and this trouble any more; his arm was useless to
defend, his strength powerless to protect. 
It was a secret no longer  between him, and her, and a few tried friends (mark
geith) (mr tettin) (mr clayfield). Every chattering errand-boy in the Court
knew now that Mr Geith had "deserted" one wife and married another; his clerks
understood what that richly-dressed woman had come for when she flounced up the
staircase, and instructed Mr Geith's most confidential clerk to tell his
employer he was wanted. With that shrinking from having his affairs talked over
by the world, which had always been a characteristic of the accountant, he.
imagined in a moment how the thing would fly; how the boys (chattering
errand-boys), meeting their companions in the street, would tell them about the
"jolly row" there has just been in Fen Court. He could see them, parcel in
hand, basket on head, shouting to each other across Lime Street and Cullum
Street; he followed the clerks (two new clerks) home, and heard them rehearse
the scene to their mothers and sisters (clerks' female relatives); he mentally
listened to the servants (fen court servants) talking the matter over with the
neighbouring housekeepers, and beheld nurse (walter's nurse) weeping as she
spoke of that "blessed child (walter ambrose) which misses (beryl) always said
might someday be a barrow-knight."
Prophetically, George Geith saw and heard all this as he lifted Beryl and
carried her up-stairs, out of the reach of the angry woman (mrs geith), away
from the eager group of listeners below. 
He did not try to stop his wife, but let her say what she would: he let her
lie; he let her shout out the whole story of his folly, his misery, his
cowardice, for the parish to hear if it liked to; he never opened his lips to
answer her, and when she began to speak about Beryl, he only took his darling
to his heart, and bore the poor, terrified child away. 
She had been brave once, but she was brave no longer. 
"What can she do, George? what can she do?" was all Beryl could moan out, as
she lay on the sofa watching her husband, who was sitting with his elbows on
the table, and his hands covering his face. 
He was too sick to speak; it seemed as though he had lost the power to answer;
and when at last his silence grew unendurable, Beryl staggered to her feet, and
put her arms feebly and imploringly round his neck, crying out, "What can she
do, George? what can she do?"
"I do not know," he answered. 
"What are you thinking about, then? what are you afraid of?" she asked, a
terrible dread, a worse horror, causing her breath to come quick and short. 
"I am thinking we must part, my darling," and George, holding her to his heart,
rained tears over her; tears that had they been of blood could not have left
his heart colder, nor his face paler.
"Part, George! why should we part?"
"You heard what she said; you know what the world will say we are to one
another now;" and the man's voice was hoarse with his passionate weeping,
broken by the sobs that he could not restrain. "Oh, Beryl! my love, my
treasure; how I have striven to keep this sorrow from you; how little I thought
I was taking you to myself for this  for this  "
She did not answer him; she slid out of his arms to the floor, and lay there
with her loosened hair falling over the carpet, where it caught the golden
sunbeams as they fell. Without everything was so bright, within everything was
so gloomy; the leaves were on the trees; the sun was shining high and clear
over London; the dusty, dingy town sparrows were chirping and twittering in the
branches and upon the tops of the neighbouring houses. The pavement in Billiter
Square looked clean and white; the summer glory was at its zenith, and it had
come but to bring this wretchedness to the two, who had enjoyed the full
happiness of so many a summer's day together. 
How was it, that looking at her, as she lay there in her misery, refusing help,
refusing comfort, another picture rose up like a reality before George Geith,
and compelled his attention. 
He had crossed the fields to Withefell; he stood at the stile once more; he saw
the grassy glade; the arching trees; the sunbeams coming and going, flickering
and dancing, now hiding, now seeking among the leaves; a young girl (Beryl)
with her dogs (guess the dog) (royal the dog); a happy, smiling, blushing,
innocent, pretty face turned towards him; brown eyes lifted fearlessly to his. 
Through his tears the man saw this; he saw the summer through a mist of grief;
he had met her there, and he had brought her here; he had found her frank and
fearless, trusting and guileless; and behold! she was now lying before him,
with her heart broken, with her happiness destroyed, humbled to the dust. 
But still resolved not to leave him. When she spoke, when she could speak
rather, the first words she uttered were, "George, if you do love me, you
cannot go away and leave me. Unless you put me from you, I will never leave
you." He tried to raise her, but she would not let him; he attempted to soothe
her. but she would not listen. With hands clasping his feet, with her head
still lying on the floor, she prayed him not to forsake her, not to ask her to go. 
"What was the world to her?" she asked; "what was any one in the world but
George? whom had she ever loved but him? what had she ever done that she should
be cast off now? she was his wife  his in her own eyes  "
"And I know God thinks I am your wife, too, George," finished Beryl; "if I am
not your wife, nobody ever was or will be; and I cannot part from you now, and
I will not, though you bid me go fifty times a day."
He could not do it; whatever might be right or whatever might be wrong, he
could not listen to such pleadings, and repeat that they must separate. He
could not see her dear head laid so low, and find courage to confirm his sentence. 
She was more than wife to him; she was his life, his love, his all: and, as she
wished to stay with him, why, they would pass the future together, let the
future bring with it what it liked. 
True, George felt, what he knew he should never be able to make Beryl
understand, viz., that each day as it came would increase the difficulty of their position. 
Man and wife they might call themselves  man and wife, in the sight of God,
they had surely been: still, the question now was, not what they thought, not
what they had been, but what they were, what they would be in the future. 
Yet, though he was conscious of this, George Geith could urge Beryl no further.
He had found it hard enough to con tend against his own love, against his own
desperate longing; but to have to battle also against her misery, to have to
unclasp the dear arms from around his neck, to have to put her, spite of her
prayers, and tears, and supplications, away from his heart and his home, George
could not do it, let the end prove what it might. 
But it was useless for them to attempt to remain in Fen Court, if they were to
live together. Beryl, at any rate, must remove to some other part of London,
where the story had not travelled, where she would not be met with prying looks
and pitying glances whenever she crossed the door-step. 
First, he took lodgings for her, and his doing so seemed to put her true
position before Beryl's wondering eyes. He explained to her why she could not
remain in Fen Court; why she must not retain the servants (fen court servants)
who had lived with them there; why they must remove to apartments till they
could meet with a desirable house; and Beryl, listening, knew that this could
not last for ever; that let her cling as closely as she liked to him, let her
hands clasp his tightly as they would, there must yet come, some day or other,
a huge wave to separate them. 
She could not have been made to comprehend this by any process of reasoning,
but events often prove stronger arguments than words; and though Beryl held on
to her spar all the more desperately as she felt the waters roaring around her,
she still knew  the poor, loving, devoted wife dreaded  that the day of their
parting would arrive ere long. 
To one lodging after another the news of their invalid marriage followed them.
There seemed no use in moving, in changing servants, and yet still they had to
move; and Beryl never was allowed by George to keep the same nurse for two weeks together. 
"We will get a house of some kind, even though it be not all we wish, and put
an end to this," said George at last; and before the week was out he had found
a home for her, in a lovely, romantic, out-of-the-way spot, not far from
Snaresbrook, and on the very edge of Epping Forest.
"My darling will have peace here," thought the unhappy man, as he walked
through the woods when the autumn leaves were falling, and stopped to look down
the long glades, where the acorns and the beech nuts were lying on the close
green sward, "My darling will have peace here," and for a moment he forgot the
sorrow that had come to them, and dreamt of a happiness which was never to be theirs more. 
Meantime, nothing had been heard of Mrs Geith. From the day when she had
brought such misery with her to Fen Court, George had not seen nor received any
communication from her. He had written, stating his willingness to allow her a
fixed yearly income; but that letter was returned to him through the medium of
the Dead Letter Office, with "Gone away, left no address," scrawled on the envelope. 
Where she had gone, what she was doing, no one could form an idea, until Mark
heard that some person (mrs geith) was endeavouring to ascertain what Beryl's
maiden name had been. 
Having obtained which piece of information, Sir Mark Geith put on his hat, and
went off to consult Mr Tettin. 
"What do you suppose she can be doing now?" asked the baronet. 
"She is going to try to get the second wife's friends to prosecute him for
bigamy. She cannot do it herself, you know, and as the the other will not do
it, why, she finds herself rather in a difficulty."
"It would be altogether the best thing, perhaps, that could happen to George,"
remarked the baronet; but Mr Tettin shrugged his shoulders. 
"It is a thousand pities he did not separate from his second wife (beryl) at
once," he said. "Of course, if he can satisfy a jury that those letters were
written by his first wife (mrs geith), that, in fact, he had no share in the
forgery, nothing can be done to him."
"Good Heavens, Mr Tettin! surely you are not turning against him now!" exclaimed the baronet. 
"No; I have no doubt in the matter; I believe him to have been as firmly
persuaded of her death as I was myself; but living on with the second wife
(beryl) is awkward, Sir Mark  awkward, very."
Sir Mark thought it was awkward too, and drove immediately out to Snaresbrook,
where he found Beryl, looking pale, and thin, and anxious. She heard all he had
to say; she agreed in the justice of his remarks; she replied that she would
speak to George that very evening; that she had long felt it must come someday,
and that it had come; that was all. 
Then, when Mark thought how quietly she was taking it, what a pity it was he
had never found courage to mention the, subject to her before, she broke down,
and wept as the baronet had never seen any person weep before. She cried as a
woman never cries till her heart is broken; till all hope is gone; till she has
lost everything which makes life worth living for; and Mark knew no more how to
comfort her, what to say to her, than if he had been born an idiot.  
Until at last a bright idea struck him, and when it struck him, he began: 
"Beryl, do stop; do, like a dear, good girl. If you and George will consent to
part for a time, we will get him rid of that woman (mrs g) by some means, and
you and he shall be married again, and live happily ever after."
"What do you mean?" she asked; "how can he get rid of her unless she dies? and
I am just as likely to die as she. Look at me, Mark, should you think it
probable I should outlive her."
"I was not talking about her dying," and Sir Mark took the white, thin hands
she stretched out in his, and held them while he spoke; "and I was not thinking
of killing her either; but George might get a divorce; it costs ever so much
money, but that is a matter of no consequence; and then, Beryl  then you can be
married to him once more."
"Could he get a divorce? could I marry him again?" and Beryl looked into Mark's
face, as if she would read every thought of his soul. 
"To be sure you could," he answered, gaily. "The only pity is, that George did
not tell us how he was situated, and we would have found him the money, years
before he ever met you, Beryl. But, for mercy's sake," added the baronet, "do
not begin to cry again, only hope for the best, and do as I advise you, and
everything will come right in the end."
She had not the remotest intention of crying, but she did what astonished Mark
much more, she pulled her hands out of his, and threw her arms round his neck,
and kissed and blessed him. 
He had spoken the first words of comfort she had heard since  since she knew
she was not George's wife, she said, and the sunshiny look of former days came
back for a moment into her eyes, and she wiped away her tears, and avowed her
intention of doing whatever Sir Mark told her, "No matter how hard it may be,"
finished the poor child (beryl), "I will do it; I promise you I will."
Long and earnest was the talk they had over George's future prospects, and the
result of the latter portion of it was, that Sir Mark took Beryl back to town
with him, at her own desire. 
She wanted to see Mr Foss and Mr Bemmidge, and to beg them not to answer any
inquiries, should inquiries be made. They were only too glad to be of use to
her in any way; but Mr Foss suggested that she had better proceed to Holloway,
and see Gertrude, "because," said he, "there has been a lady (mrs geith) here
within the last two hours asking for Mrs Foss's address. I was out at the time,
and when the clerk told me it never struck me who it could be till now."
Had the choice been offered to her, Beryl would rather have gone to visit a
wild Indian, than Mrs Foss, ne Gilling; but Sir Mark advised her so strongly to
lose no time about the matter that she drove direct to Lilac Lodge, which was
the name, at once rural and alliterative, of the nest Mr Foss had provided for his lady love. 
Virtuously indignant was Mrs Foss, at the idea of Beryl presuming to call upon
her. She spoke of her visit, subsequently, to her friends, as an "insolent
intrusion;" and it is very probable that, had the sight of Sir Mark's carriage
not toned down the lady's displeasure, she might have been insolent also. 
As it was, Mrs Foss was simply swelling and matronly, and detestable. She was
not on the whole sorry in her heart, perhaps, that Beryl had called; she
thought Beryl would be envious of her new furniture, covered with
antimacassars; her carpets; her bright steel grates; her chimney glass; her
chimney ornaments; as if, God help the shallow, heartless, simpleton! Beryl saw
one of these things, or would have cared if the curtains had been made of
bullion, or the floor covered with bank-notes. 
"It was very unfortunate she had not come sooner. Mrs Geith, poor woman, had
been there that very afternoon," answered Mrs Foss. 
"Wanting to know my name, and the name of the church where Mr Geith and I were married?"
"Just so," and Mrs Foss began to wish that she had not gratified the first
wife's laudable curiosity. 
"And you told her; you knew, and you told her?"
"I did."
"Then, Mrs Foss, I may tell you this, I never liked you much, and now I hate you."
Having acquainted Mrs Foss with which fact, Beryl, who had not sat down during
the interview, who had not been offered a chair, opened the drawing-room and
hall doors for herself, and walked out, leaving both open behind her. 
"I would not shut them," said Beryl, as Mark helped her into the carriage, and
after relieving her mind with this purely feminine display of temper, she fell
to wondering what would be her adversary's next move in the game. 
They were not destined to be kept long in suspense. Next day but one, George
Geith, walking out of Fen Court, was met in the passage by a couple of
policemen who took him into custody on a charge of "feloniously intermarrying
with Beryl Molozane, his first wife (mrs geith) being still alive."
CHAPTER 47. GUILTY OR NOT GUILTY? 

There could be no question about Mrs George Geith No. 1 being an exceedingly clever woman. 
She was one of those persons whose talents a virtuous public are so often in
the habit of feelingly regretting have not been employed to better purpose. 
"If he, or she," says society, "had but expended his (or her) talents in some
useful undertaking, what a blessing it would have been for him (or her) and for
the world at large."
Which is so Christian a regret, that it seems almost a pity to suggest that God
and the devil give very different gifts to their children, and that
consequently the description of cleverness which brings forth good fruits in
the service of the one as often as not, produces hopeless stupidity in the service of the other. 
To Mrs Geith the devil had been very liberal, and if she had not made as much
as she might of the capital with which he set her up in life, it was assuredly
not owing to any stinginess on the part of her friend and patron. 
As a whole, she had been lazy; she had neglected her opportunities. With her
particular talents; with her personal appearance; with her fondness for
intrigue and stratagem, Mrs Geith might have run a gloriously bad career, but
as it was, she had tried to do too much  she had asked impossibilities. 
She had wanted to be thought respectable, and yet to live disreputably; she had
wanted to stay in Egypt with the fleshpots, and yet cross over to the promised
land; so that on the whole, even in the devil's army, she was not of much use,
unless it might be for the purpose of harassing Christian people, and making
them occasionally weary of their lives. 
Under the peculiar circumstances in which she was placed, Mrs Geith had not
found it by any means so easy a matter to get her husband (George Geith) taken
into custody as she had imagined she should find it. With all domestic affairs,
the law is (fortunately) chary of interfering. It feels, and justly, that, more
especially between man and wife, it stands in the unenviable position of a
strange third party; and being wiser than most third parties, it does not care
to mix itself up with matrimonial quarrels, and rarely has anything to do with
them, until the matter in dispute is forced upon it; until, in fact, it can
decently withhold assistance no longer. 
Mrs Geith had thought she could as easily send her husband (mr geith) to prison
as she could walk across the street, but in this Mrs Geith found she was
mistaken, and as Beryl would not help her in the matter, and as Beryl's friends
if she had any  were not to be got at so easily as though London were a country
village with only half a dozen houses in it, the "ill-used wife," as she styled
herself, had to go through no end of unpleasant adventures before George was
taken into custody, as duly stated at the end of the last chapter. 
To say the least of it, Mrs Geith adopted a most ingenious plan of action. To
have remained in her lodgings would have been to lay open her plans to the
enemy to prepare them for what was coming; to rob the pleasure she intended to
give George of half its charm: whilst, on the other hand, to dog the footsteps
of her victims; to pursue them from pillar to post; to harass them secretly
whilst carrying on her great scheme of revenge; all this was quite in Mrs
Geith's best manner, and occasioned her infinite delight and satisfaction. 
To find out Beryl's maiden name; to discover the church where she had been
married; to ascertain after that where her friends lived, and which amongst
them would be the most likely to take up the prosecution, were the objects to
which Mrs Geith directed her attention, and they were objects which she might
have pursued long enough, but for the assistance afforded to her by Mrs Foss, ne Gilling. 
Without the slightest trouble; with the help merely of a little judicious
flattery of Mrs Foss, and sundry depreciating remarks concerning Beryl; by dint
of admiring Mrs Foss's house, and observing, with emotion, what a blessing it
was she had not (like the speaker) been entrapped into a marriage with such a
wretch as George Geith, she got all the information she wanted, and a great deal more besides. 
She learnt that Beryl's friends had not liked the match; that they were
wealthy; that they were proud. She heard of a certain stately Mrs Elsenham, who
lived at Kensington, with whom Beryl had resided after her father's death, and
who had been highly indignant at the match. All this pleasant and desirable
information Mrs Geith was made free of by Mrs Foss, who was certainly greatly
scandalized when she found out afterwards with what manner of woman she had been so confidential. 
"How is one to know? dear, dear, how is one to know?" sighed Gertrude to her
husband (Mr. Foss), when future revelations made her stand aghast, "and how is
one to know, indeed," if, as poor Mrs Foss imagined, a black moire antique
dress, a quiet bonnet, a velvet cloak and sables (real sables as Mrs Bemmidge
was duly informed) make the worst woman living respectable, the lowest of the
low presentable, notwithstanding the silk and the velvet cover, like charity, a multitude of sins. 
Was it not excusable in Mrs Foss to be taken in, when that old woman of the
world, that wise, prudent, orthodox, saintly Mrs Elsenham, received her visitor
with, figuratively speaking, open arms? 
Many circumstances conspired to make the intelligence, though terribly
shocking, acceptable to Mrs Elsenham. Primarily, she hated George Geith;
secondly, her liver was out of order, and she consequently wanted some object
on which to vent her ill-humour; thirdly, she had had a fresh quarrel with
Matilda; and, fourthly, she had just parted with her tenth companion, and
thought, in a moment, how admirably Beryl could supply her place. 
As for the child (walter ambrose), of course Mr Geith must see to that; equally
as a matter of course, Beryl would be only too thankful to return to Kensington. 
"A nice mess she made of it," remarked the old lady (Maria Elsenham), with a
certain Christian satisfaction. "And so she is living on with him! what of
that? where would you have the girl to go to, when she has not a relation in
the world who would take her in but myself? It is no wonder she is afraid to
come to me, either, for, although I, perhaps, ought not to say it of myself, I
believe there is not another woman in London besides Maria Elsenham, who would
receive the girl back again after her shameful ingratitude and treachery."
"Then, madam, you will take the matter up?" ventured Mrs Geith. "I  I have no
friends; I have no one like you to see me righted," and the virtuous and
ill-used wife had recourse to her pocket-handkerchief. 
From behind this ambush, she could see Mrs Elsenham grimly surveying her dress. 
"The old hag is calculating how much it cost," thought Mrs George Geith; and
still keeping the handkerchief to her face she went on: "I am sure if I had not
had money of my own, how I should have lived all these years I can't imagine. I
must have gone on the parish or died in a ditch. When he left the Church "
"The wicked wretch," groaned Mrs Elsenham. "When he left the Church I lost all
trace of him, and it was by the merest accident I learnt he was still living, and in London."
Straightway Mrs Elsenham sent for her solicitor (mrs elsenham's solicitor).
With all convenient speed that gentleman arrived, thinking the lady was about
to alter her will for the thirty-first time. Great, therefore, was his
astonishment when Mrs Elsenham informed him she wished the man (George Geith)
who had married her granddaughter (Beryl) taken into custody at once.
"On a charge of bigamy," said the old lady triumphantly; and if (I the
narrator) say that she smacked her lips after the sentence, I trust (I the
narrator) shall not be accused either of vulgarity or exaggeration. Had Beryl
known whose hand it was that flung her husband (george) into prison, she would
have gone off to Kensington forthwith and frightened her grandmother (maria
elsenham) into a fit, with her vehement reproaches, with her passionate sorrow.
As it was, however, fortunately perhaps for all parties, Beryl was located in
Halkin Street with Lady Geith, who had taken the poor wife to her heart and her
affections at once. 
Meantime George had been brought up before the magistrate, had been examined
and remanded, had been brought up again, and finally bailed out by Mr Finch, of
Fore Street, and his cousin, Sir Mark Geith. 
The case was one which, as the magistrate was kind enough to remark, it would
be improper for him to deal with summarily. It must go before a jury, and
before a jury in due course George Geith had the pleasure of appearing. 
"It was a peculiar case," as the counsel for the prosecution observed to the
court, "a very peculiar case," and at this point he got his double eye-glasses
on his nose again, and referred to his brief. "It was peculiar in all its
bearings. He, the learned (prosecution counsel), might indeed safely affirm, it
was the most peculiar case in which in the whole course of his professional
experience he had ever been engaged."
Having by this time got his eye-glasses into focus, and made the (court
audience) desirous of a change, he proceeded to state the case. He told how the
prisoner at the bar (george) had at a very early period of life married the
unfortunate lady who had the misfortune to be Mrs George Geith; how he had
deserted her; how, on her applying to him for maintenance, on her demanding
that he should acknowledge her as his wife, he had disappeared from Morelands,
and left her destitute. 
"Where do we find this man again?" continued the (prosecution counsel),
surveying the court over his eye-glasses, which he had now got firmly fixed on
the very end of his nose; "when and how do we meet once more with the Rev.
George Geith? Has he been abroad? has he been Christianizing the savages of
Africa? has he been giving his services to the Church to which he devoted
himself? has he been existing on some poor stipend in a country parish, or
labouring amongst the wretched inhabitants of an East of London district? No
such thing," and the (prosecution counsel) grew at this point quite vehement
and emphatic; "no such thing. He had left the Church, (generic mark) you that,
gentlemen of the jury, and he was living with his second wife in affluence in Fen Court."
Fen Court might not, he admitted, seem to the gentlemen of the jury the precise
locality which a man of Mr Geith's birth, education, and means would select for
a residence; but he (the (prosecution counsel)) was in a position to prove to
them (the gentlemen of the jury), that Mr Geith had chosen to live in Fen
Court, not from any want of money, but simply because he thought he should
thereby be better able to escape detection. He should merely briefly notice, in
conclusion, the circumstances under which Mr Geith contracted his second
marriage; and after that he would call such witnesses (witnesses for the
prosecution) as could not fail to convince the enlightened and respectable
jury, which he had the privilege of addressing, that the prisoner at the bar
was guilty of the offence laid to his charge; guilty in fact, guilty in intent;
guilty without an extenuating circumstance in his favour, and as such deserving
of the extremest punishment which the law of the land could inflict."
It is strange how different the tale of a man's life seems when recounted by
another, to what it has done when thought over by himself. In the one case, he
has not been called upon to give a reason for every minute action; day by day
the story has been written, and he in looking back has known that, day by clay,
there was some feeling, or motive, or fear, sufficiently strong to account for
the manner in which each line was traced, and has been lenient to himself accordingly. 
But when another condenses the story, and repeats it for him! Ah! my friends
(readers), it is quite another matter then. We never know what cowards, what
wretches, what sinners, what misers, what extravagant self-indulgent creatures
we have been till our enemy opens our eyes; and, on the other hand, we never
quite know how well we have struggled, how sick to death we have been, how
forbearing and long-suffering we have proved ourselves, through what trials and
troubles we have passed with calm faces, till some friend takes to dramatizing
our poor tale, and gives it a force, and an excitement, and an interest it never possessed for us. 
A man, as a rule, paints his own life for himself in neutral tints. If he wish
to see all the dark shades filled in on the one side, all the virtues
illuminated with a golden halo on the other, he must stand in the dock, as
George Geith did, and hear his story  the prisoner's  read out by the counsel for the prosecution. 
According to that learned individual, George was the very incarnation of the
Evil One. He deserted his wife (mrs geith), he left the Church, he amassed
money, honourably he (the counsel) (counsel for the prosecution) trusted. To
have heard that really respectable gentleman holding forth, one might have
thought George was a devourer of widows' houses, a deliberate destroyer of
domestic happiness, a roaring lion going up and down the earth, first in the
Church, and then out of it, looking out for money to appropriate, and girls to marry and desert. 
His weary years of servitude were spoken of as golden hours of liberty, in
which he was amassing wealth; his lonely, desolate life in Fen Court as a
period when he was free to work out his nefarious plans without check of any
kind. Every act of his existence  the best, the most innocent  was somehow
twisted round into wickedness by this man; till George himself, worn by sorrow,
filled with self-reproach, began to wonder whether, after all, it might not be
true; whether he could ever have wrought such wretchedness for himself and
Beryl had he not been as great a sinner, as unprincipled a villain, as great a
fool, as the (counsel for the prosecution), eye-glasses in one hand and brief
in the other, now he had got well into his speech, asserted. 
How would it go with him? Everything seemed to point to his guilt, every
circumstance seemed unfavourable to the sup position of his innocence. On those
letters  that had lain so long forgotten, he had depended for his immediate
acquittal; he had produced them before the magistrate, thinking he should be
liberated at once; he had felt no anxiety on the subject until recently: but
now, the (prosecution counsel), speaking of those letters, implied that George
himself was the author of them; that it was all a cleverly contrived trick of
his own devising. Supposing he could not prove his wife (mrs geith) had written
them, what then? why, then, imprisonment or transportation; and George, in his
terror, as the idea occurred to him, looked at the jury, to see what impression
the (prosecution counsel)'s speech was producing on them. 
If ever a jury had determined beforehand to serve their country, and avenge
their own wrongs by "hanging somebody," the twelve who sat in judgment assuredly composed it. 
Before coming into court they had prejudged this "run-away clergyman;" this
"gentleman in business;" this "wolf" who had hid himself in the City to conceal
his nefarious practices. They were as sure of his guilt, as  they were  that 
that their stick was of wood. He had the look of a scoundrel. It was an insult
to a respectable body of gentlemen that a "feller " like that "should stand a
staring at them," as the foreman remarked to the individual who sat next him.
Bigamy ought to be put down, and it should; the ruffian ought to be punished,
and he should. If a man could not content himself with one wife, he must be
made to smart for it. What security would be left for parents, what safety for
daughters, if such villains were permitted to escape scot-free?"
All this George Geith read in the twelve faces turned towards him, whenever the
(prosecution counsel) launched a thunder bolt at his head; all this the learned
(prosecution counsel)  put into words for them  into words that branded the
prisoner as a monster of iniquity, and caused the audience to whisper that he
must be "a regular bad 'un  out and out."
On the prisoner himself the speech of the learned (prosecution counsel)
produced, as (I the narrator) have said, a decided disheartening effect; but
just when his spirits were sinking below zero, help and encouragement came to
him from a most unexpected quarter  namely, from Mr Richard Elsenham, who,
though on the bench, where, together with Sir Mark Geith and a number of
notables who had come to hear the trial, he had been accommodated with a seat,
winked at the prisoner (george geith) in a manner which clearly intimated that
he, Mr Elsenham, thought the "old humbug" had done the best he could in return
for his grandmother (maria elsenham)'s guineas, but that it was all "bosh" and "rubbish."
The (prosecution counsel) saw the look of intelligence, and knowing who Dick
Elsenham was, reddened with passion. The foreman saw it, and taking the "young
swell," with his bloated face and insolent swagger, for a friend of the man
with two wives, put another cross against George's name in his mental
note-book. It was very ill-bred; it was very imprudent; but it reassured the
accused more than any kind sentences could have done. For the first time in his
life he really liked Richard Elsenham, and felt grateful to him. 
Meantime the witnesses for the prosecution were being examined. Evidence of the
first marriage was adduced. Evidence of the second likewise. To George's grief,
Mr Hayles was called to speak not for, but against him, and the poor old
clergyman told what he knew hesitatingly and mournfully. 
His hesitation and sorrow told against the prisoner. Apparently, everything was
working in his disfavour; everything seemed to have had such a twist that the
very sources from which he expected help only made the case for the prosecution
stronger; and when his own counsel rose to speak in his defence, George felt
that, with all the evidence which he could bring forward, it would be but after
all a toss up whether he was convicted or not. 
Very different was the speech of the learned counsel for the defence, to that
of the learned counsel for the prosecution. Plain and unvarnished was the tale
he told; plain and unembellished as that (I the narrator) have tried, feebly
though it may be, to tell to you. Back through the years he went, to the youth
of the man (george geith) you have never known except as middle-aged. He spoke
of the expectations of that youth; of the seeds of promise it contained; of the
hopeful years that lay before the boy, for he was little more than a boy, said
the counsel (counsel for the defence), pityingly, when he met the woman he
unhappily married (mrs geith). Nearly related to a wealthy and ancient house,
with talents above the average, with fair prospects, with life before him to
make what he chose out of, he met with an artful, designing, unprincipled
woman, older than himself in years, and double his age in knowledge of the
world, in experience of the evil that is in the world  met her, and eventually married her. 
"I lay no stress, gentlemen of the jury," proceeded the learned counsel for the
defence, "on the fact that he was entrapped into that marriage, for that is
beside the question. I freely admit that he did marry her, that, in the sight
of God and man, he took her for better for worse, for richer for poorer.
Gentlemen," went on the learned (defence counsel), "there is one cause for
which, according to the law of England, a man may separate himself from his
wife, although there is no reservation to that effect in the Matrimonial
Service of the Church  that cause is unfaithfulness.
"Ere long, my unhappy client discovered his wife to be unfaithful, and there
can be no question but that he would have inflicted summary punishment on the
partner of her guilt, but that both fled from the wrath of the injured husband.
At that juncture it was Mrs Geith who deserted my client, and not my client who deserted her."
Great dissatisfaction was here evident among the jury; the case for the
prosecution had been so clear, they could have convicted upon it at once; but
the case for the defence was perplexing, and they began to move uneasily upon
their seats. Meantime the counsel for the prisoner proceeded:  
"In the days of which I speak, divorce was a luxury unobtainable by any save
persons possessed of large incomes  my client (george) was poor. Had the
misadventure I have referred to occurred at the present day, he could speedily
have freed himself from all old ties, and walked into the world unfettered; as
it was, he walked out into the world, it is true, but burdened by an unfaithful
wife; bound down by the weight of a secret he was ashamed to acknowledge."
Lightly the (defence counsel) passed over the time George spent at Morelands;
all things considered, perhaps that was the time of the prisoner's life which
least would bear scrutiny; but in describing the interview between the curate
(george) and his abandoned wife (mrs geith); in telling how the money he had
saved for the purpose of procuring a divorce was wrung from him by the threat
of exposure; in speaking of his flight from Morelands; of his renunciation of
the Church, and of the living the Church held for him, the counsel (counsel for
the defence) was at home. It was a sad tale, and he told it well  so well, that
the females (female court audience) began to have recourse to their
pocket-handkerchiefs, whilst the men (male court audience) remarked: "Life had
been hard lines with him, after all."
From that point the (counsel for the defence) grew eloquent; his (george) hard
struggles in London, his fight for bread, his brave battle, his ultimate
success; these things became, in the hands of the accustomed orator, weapons of
strength. He could tell of the hope deferred; he could speak of the reward
delayed; he could speak of days of trial, of nights of anxiety, of labour, such
as none save those who had themselves laboured could understand; of hardships
encountered, of difficulties vanquished, such as no man who had not himself
borne the heat and burden of the day could comprehend. 
Without friends, without capital, without previous business training, he had
made his way up. He had sent money to his wife (mrs geith), so that till he was
rid of her, till she had no husband, he no wife, she might live honestly if she would. 
He had sent to her, no matter what he lacked himself; and he had saved; he had,
with all a miser's eagerness, with more than a miser's pertinacity, laid pound
to pound, so that he might one day be rid of the woman who had darkened and cursed his life. 
"In the midst of all this working and saving," went on the (defence counsel),
"liberty came to my client (george). He heard his (mrs geith) wife was dead;
heard it, as he believed, from the Hon. and Rev. Mr Clayfield, who will be
produced as a witness. At first he thought the intimation might be a trick, a
ruse to ascertain his whereabouts, but when a certificate of burial, a
certificate which shall be submitted to you, was forwarded to him, he thought
the news was true; he looked upon himself as a single man."
Doubtless, admitted counsel (counsel for the defence), Mr Geith was unwise not
to proceed at once to Cornwall and ascertain particulars for himself; but, he
argued, if letters purporting to be written by a clergyman whose name appeared
in the "Clergy List;" (mr clayfield) if a telegraphic message, if a certificate
of burial could not be taken as evidence of death, what could? he put it to
them (the jury) as men of sense (which (I the narrator) may remark they were
not), as men with reasoning faculties (which counsel in his heart knew they had
not), as men of feeling (which phrase counsel used as a mere facon de parler)
what could be taken? He, the (defence counsel), confessed himself unable to
answer his own question, and dropped it accordingly. 
"Besides," he explained, "the journey would have been expensive, inconvenient,
and painful, while there lay the proofs. If Mr Clayfield's letters were, as it
now turned out they were, forgeries, was his unfortunate client answerable for
that? Certainly not. If the failure of Nortons' bank, a failure which would be
remembered throughout the country almost as long as the South Sea Bubble,
prevented his client (george geith) marrying his second wife publicly, and
surrounded by the orthodox number of bridesmaids, was he to be branded as a
villain in consequence? 
"Had he been cruel to that wife? Had he deserted her? In the course of this
most painful trial it had been made a point against the prisoner that he had
continued to live with his second wife (beryl) after the first (mrs geith)
reappeared before him, but he thought that on consideration his learned friend
would see that fact told rather in his client's favour than otherwise. Had he
been harsh to her, she would have gladly left him; had he deliberately betrayed
her, she would have been there to give evidence against him that day; but as it
was, he first wished to spare her grief, and she subsequently wished to soothe
his grief;" and the (defence counsel) forthwith drew such a picture of Beryl,
and the happiness of their wedded life, that George Geith could not bear it,
but bowed his head on the front of the dock while he listened.
Not an atom affected, however, were the jurors. They looked only at the stern
facts of the case, not at the sentimental and pathetic. To them Mrs Geith was
an ill-used, and rather a desirable wife, Beryl merely an imprudent young woman
with an ill-regulated mind, who ought to have known better. 
One by one, George's witnesses were examined, and cross examined; not a stone
had Sir Mark left unturned which was likely to be of service to his cousin. He
had striven hard to find out a previous husband for Mrs Geith; failing that he
got together any people he could who were willing and able to prove that she
had left George, and that George had not left her. 
Out of the past rose a cloud of witnesses who, one and all, bore testimony to
Mrs Geith's shortcomings. If her husband (george) had liked to resist her
claim, as his (counsel for the defence) remarked, he need never have crippled
himself to allow her sixpence; but instead of resisting her claim, he had made
her, for his poor means, an ample allowance, "which all passed through my
hands," Mr Tettin stated on oath. The examination of Mr Tettin was, in its way,
quite a little romance. "The Rev. George Geith," he said, "first called at his
office immediately after his flight from Morelands. He communicated to him (Mr
Tettin) all the circumstances which induced him to relinquish his curacy; he
told him every particular connected with his unfortunate marriage, and further
informed him that so soon as he could make (or save) sufficient money to obtain
a divorce, he intended to do so. For seven years," proceeded Mr Tettin, "I
remitted twenty-five pounds every six months to his wife (mrs geith). How, out
of a clerk's salary, he ever managed to send so much to her, I do not know; he
never increased that sum; in my opinion it was ample, and had he asked my
opinion, which he never did on any subject, I should have told him so.
"It was in the summer of 1847 those letters came into my hands. I was out of
town when they were delivered at my office, but on my return I forwarded the
three (i.e., the two letters and the telegraphic message) to Mr Geith. Directed
them to the Rev. George Geith, care of Grant & Co., accountants, Fen Court,
City. Did not know till afterwards that Mr Geith was Grant & Co. Did not know
he passed in the City under the name of Gregory Grant. If I had known it,
should have considered he had sufficient reason for doing so. 
"Had never any doubt but that Mr Clayfield wrote those letters, until a
conversation occurred between Mr Clayfield and myself, in which he stated  "
The learned counsel for the prosecution here intimated a wish that Mr Tettin
would confine himself to facts within his own knowledge. 
The learned counsel for the defence maintained Mr Tettin had a right to repeat
what had passed in conversation between himself and Mr Clayfield. The learned
judge decided that such evidence was admissible, but kindly offered to make a
note of the objection.
The learned counsel for the prosecution thanked his lordship, and wished the note made. 
While his lordship was making it the learned counsel for the defence said he
would not examine Mr Tettin about the conversation with Mr Clayfield, as that
gentleman himself would repeat what he had said on the subject. After this
useful and entertaining digression, Mr Tettin was allowed to describe that
interview with the prisoner (george geith), at which the reader was likewise
present, and further to communicate to the jury all the facts that had come to
his knowledge up to the moment of speaking. 
The great points elicited from him, and which no cross-examination could shake,
were, that the money had passed through his hands; that for seven years it had
been regularly paid; that he, himself, had transmitted it to Cambridge, and
that he had duly received acknowledgments of its arrival there. Further,
likewise through him, Mr Geith had forwarded money to the Rev. Mr Clayfield to
defray the expenses of his wife (mrs geith)'s funeral. 
"A regular statement was returned to my letter," proceeded Mr Tettin, "and a
sum of three shillings and sevenpence re turned to me in postage stamps, said
sum being the balance remaining after payment of the charges incurred."
All these letters, receipts, and statements, together with the certificate of
burial, were duly produced in court, after which proceeding, the Honourable and
Reverend Mr Clayfield swore, that towards the latter end of the year 1846, his
wife (mrs clayfield) being in delicate health, he engaged as attendant on her 
half attendant and half companion  a person whom he now believed to be Mrs
Geith, but who was recommended to him by a clergyman in Cambridgeshire, under
the name of Matthews. In the summer of 1847, he and his wife (mrs clayfield)
went abroad for a couple of months. During their absence Mrs Matthews was left
in charge of the vicarage. During that period the letters now shown to him must
have been written. He kept his note-paper, letter-paper, and envelopes, in a
drawer in his library table. That drawer he never locked. Undoubtedly any
person in the house could have helped him or herself to paper, had they been so
minded. Sealing-wax, and a seal, with his crest and motto cut upon it, lay on
an inket, which usually stood on the library table. The paper on which the
letter produced was written, was similar to that he ordinarily used. Except
when in mourning he always used red wax; and he had no doubt whatever but that
the envelope now shown him had been sealed by his wax and stamped with his
seal. The handwriting was not his. It was a clever imitation, but it was not his. 
To the Judge: "The imitation is close enough to deceive a casual observer."
To the Foreman: "I can swear the letter is not in my handwriting, because I
never wrote such a letter, and never, to my knowledge, had a person of the name live in my parish."
To a Juror: "Am quite certain I could not have forgotten such a correspondence,
had it ever taken place. (Examination resumed.) 
"How Mrs Matthews contrived to obtain the requisite form for the certificate, I
am quite unable to conjecture. Presume, however, she must have obtained it
somehow, as I see the certificate here.
"To the Foreman: "Had such a death and burial taken place in the parish, an
entry to that effect would be made at Somerset House. Am bound  "
Mr Clayfield was wearily proceeding, when the judge remarked, that as there was
no dispute about Mrs Geith being alive, he thought it was unnecessary to go
further into the question of her burial. 
"Whilst we were abroad Mrs Matthews wrote saying that she should like to leave,
having obtained a situation as housekeeper, which promised to be permanent.
That situation was with a Mr Solland, whose estates are in Cornwall, though he
spends most of his time either in London or on the Continent. I gave Mrs
Matthews a good character; I had no reason to do otherwise, having always
considered her a very trustworthy and superior person."
When the examination and cross-examination of the Hon. Mr Clayfield was ended,
the judge looked towards the jury as though he expected some intimation from
them; but the jury, still dissatisfied with Mr Geith, still feeling that the
forgery of the letters had not been brought home to the first wife (mrs geith),
made up their twelve minds that they would disappoint the judge, and bring the prisoner in guilty. 
It had been a toss-up, but now George Geith felt the scale was turning against
him, when another, and to him most unlooked-for, witness appeared in the box  a
witness hunted up by Mark from the remote ends of the earth  who, being duly
sworn, stated himself to be Reginald Solland. 
He knew Mrs Matthews; he had engaged her as house keeper. She had left him
without a character; had refused to give her one. She had been in his service
twelve months. Believed she hoped to be made Mrs Solland. Passed herself off as
a widow. Desired her to look out for another situation when he first began to
suspect her design. Refused to give her a character, not because she had
planned to become Mrs Solland, but because she had forged orders to different
tradespeople, and obtained goods on the strength of those orders. I threatened
her at the time to give her in charge," said Mr Solland, composedly, "and I am
sorry now that I did not. I see the person who called herself Mrs Matthews in
court," went on this inexorable gentleman, with a perfectly placid manner and
unruffled expression, and he pointed out Mrs Geith, to the great disgust of the
foreman, who thought that, but for the evidence of this Cornish Squire, they
would have known exactly how to deal with the prisoner at the bar. 
As it was, after the judge had told the jury as plainly as he could speak, that
they must acquit him, they sent back to ask his lordship if they could not find
him guilty of bigamy with a recommendation to mercy, because he did not know he was doing it. 
If a judge ever swears (in silence, of course, (I the narrator) mean), that
judge inwardly anathematized that jury; but with an outward patience which it
was really touching to witness, he repeated to them what he had said before,
and assured them that if they believed the evidence which had been laid before
them, they must acquit the prisoner. If they did not believe the evidence, it
would then be their duty to return a verdict of guilty. 
What they might eventually have done, how many times they would have mystified
themselves over the contradiction that the man had committed bigamy, and yet
that, according to the judge's ruling, he had not committed it; that he had
married two wives, and yet that he had not married the second, is uncertain,
had a traitor not suddenly appeared in the camp, in the person of a refractory
oilman, who declared he would take the judge's word before the foreman's; that
he knew if they brought the prisoner (george)in guilty, they would be sent back
again; that so far as he was concerned, he thought the first wife (mrs geith) a
bad lot, and that the man had done very fair and handsome by her. 
Further, the oilman remarked that it was getting late, and that for his part he
should like some supper. The mention of the supper proved too much for the rest
of the jury. They rose in a body, and requested the foreman to return a verdict of  "Not Guilty."
Which the foreman did, but to the last hour of his life the law of bigamy
puzzled his understanding; and though Mr Geith walked out of court free, one at
least of his jurors was as much dissatisfied with the verdict as Mrs Geith herself. 
CHAPTER 48. PARTED. 

Till the trial was ended, the verdict returned, the excitement over, the
anxiety past and gone, George and Beryl had never felt that they had ceased to
be man and wife, that they were separated from one another. It was only when
the daily routine of existence had to be commenced again; when he went back to
his office, and she to the little employments and petty occupations of a
woman's life, that they felt the breadth and length and depth of the gulf lying
between them, that they began to be afraid of the future, to dread looking
towards the morrow; aware that each morrow as it came could only bring greater
loneliness than its predecessor. 
To Beryl, indeed, the separation did not appear so frightful as to George. She
had hope to sustain her, which he had not. Delusive as a rainbow though the
comfort might be which Sir Mark had held out to her, still Beryl, knowing no
better, ran on after the rainbow like a child. 
He had told her George could get a divorce from his first wife (mrs geith),
fully believing what he said; and now, when he learnt he had been mistaken, he
lacked courage to reveal the truth to her; he felt what he said to his wife
(cissy hayles), that he had rather go hang himself than see the same look in
her face again, which he had seen there once before. 
No one in the house had greater courage than Mark, no one dared to pull away
the last plank from under her feet, to cut the last feeble rope to which she
was clinging, to tell her that nothing but death could now free George from his
first wife (mrs geith), that whilst she lived he could never marry any one. 
She had laid the balm to her heart, that he could obtain a divorce, that she
should some day, some day not very far distant, perhaps, be able to go home
again, and live with him once more. She had pictured to herself days of
happiness in that sweet cottage which he had lately taken for her. Life without
George  that idea never entered her mind. An earth without a sun would have
seemed as rational to Beryl. 
Every word of the trial she read, seated in the drawing-room at Halkin Street;
every word, and the paper was blistered with tears when she had finished. "To
think of my having ever been angry with him," she reflected; "to think of that
time when I felt as if I could have left him! "And the loving creature never
stopped to ask herself how far she would have gone, without turning back to
welcome his footsteps on his threshold once more. 
As for George, when he heard by what promises Beryl had been reconciled to her
separation; when he knew with what hopes she was looking forward to the future,
he almost raved in the extremity of his distress. 
To lawyer after lawyer he repaired for advice, for assistance; but lawyer after
lawyer repeated what the wretched man knew too well already; that he had by his
own act, of his own free will, barred himself from a divorce; that the old law
and the new law alike refused help to such as he; that not all the judges in
England, not all the money in Lombard Street, could give him freedom now. 
He could not tell it to her; he could not write it; he went about his business
mechanically during the day, and at night returned to Snaresbrook, to the house
which was dear to him, because she had liked it, because they had wandered
through the forest glades together, because she had left in every room traces
of her presence; because she had gone forth from that place, not as though she
had intended to stay away from it for ever, but merely as she might have gone
out for a day or two, leaving her work-basket here, her half-finished
embroidery there, her music littering about the piano, something belonging to
her in every nook and corner. 
So the days passed by, and Beryl began to sicken for tidings of her husband
(george). She asked why he did not come to Halkin Street. She watched for the
(halkin street postman); she wrote to him, entreating him to answer. She
inquired of Sir Mark, of Cissy, of Lady Geith, if he were ill, if he were dead;
and, at last, reading in their faces that though he might be neither ill nor
dead, something unfortunate had occurred, she insisted on going down to
Snaresbrook. "To tell him something, to give him something," said the poor
child, "and then I will be patient; I will, indeed."
Patient! till when? Sir Mark and his wife (cissy) exchanged glances as she
spoke; but neither tried to change her intention. Perhaps both felt that it
would be better for George and Beryl to meet again, for her to learn from his
lips that what she hoped, and was looking forward to, might never be  never  so
long as the sun rose and set upon the earth. 
They thought George might break the shock to her as none of them could. They
expected if she saw him once more, if they talked over the happy past, over the
lonely future, quietly and sorrowfully together, she might be better content to
submit to the inevitable separation; more reconciled to the solitary life that lay before her. 
They had advised George not to come and see her, hoping that absence would
teach her what they were afraid to tell; but now they yielded to her wish, to
go to Snaresbrook; and she went over there accordingly, accompanied by Sir Mark and Lady Geith. 
Cissy had declined being one of the party totally. Seeing more of Beryl than
any of the others; listening to her moaning complaints; watching her through
the days as she fretted and sobbed, and wandered restlessly about the house;
Cissy understood that the visit was likely to prove a more painful one than she
cared to witness. She knew from the time Beryl decided on taking (Walter
ambrose) with her, that she had not the faintest idea how matters really stood;
and though Cissy tried to shake her faith a little, endeavoured to prepare her
for the shock, Beryl proved wonderfully obtuse; and talked on about seeing
George, wondering how he would look, how he was, what had kept him from her,
hoping he had not forgotten her, trusting he was not ill, till the rector's
daughter (cissy), who had loved George so much herself in the old days at
Morelands, could bear it no longer, but went and implored Mark to tell Beryl
the worst, to give her some faint idea of what awaited her at Snaresbrook. 
Mark would have done it if he could, but he felt that if she (beryl) were
unable to guess at the truth herself, if his absence, if his silence, had told
her nothing of the shadow lying across her path, George himself was the only
person who ought to speak to her on the subject; that, if he could not make the
blow lighter to her, no person on earth could. 
"I think they will be better after they have seen one another," said Mark,
"only I wish she was not quite so excited about the matter. If I had known how
the law stood, I would have driven many a mile rather than gone there to raise
false hopes; but we will see what George will say, surely her visit will bring
matters to a crisis."
Flushed with excitement, trembling with eagerness, Beryl talked and chattered
most of the way down; but as they passed Leytonstone and Wanstead, and drew
nearer and nearer to the house, she began to shiver, and to wonder whether or
not she ought to turn back. 
"Do you think he will be glad to see me? do you really think he will not be
angry at me for coming?"
"Angry, my child, what can make you think of such a thing," and Lady Geith took
one of Beryl's hot, burning hands in hers, and held it tenderly. 
"Because, you know, he may have been waiting till he had some very good news,
some certain news, I mean; and if so, he would think me impatient and
wearisome. But I have tried to be patient, have I not?" and Beryl turned her
eyes on Lady Geith with a beseeching, entreating look, that would have melted a heart of stone. 
"My dear, you must not doubt George; you must not, in deed, no matter what happens."
"I do not doubt him, only I hope he will not be vexed," said Beryl, and she
looked from the carriage-window, as she spoke, at the groups of holiday-makers,
who had come out from London to spend Sunday under the shade of those grand old
trees, which are now, alas! disappearing under the axe and hatchet. She had
chosen Sunday for her visit, because on that day she was certain of finding
George at home and at leisure. 
She had written to tell him she should come, and he stood now looking and
watching for her arrival, ready to lift her to the ground the moment the carriage stopped. 
Beryl!  George!  It was all they said, but Mark saw his cousin's lip tremble,
and the tears rolling down Beryl's cheeks, as they walked together into the house hand-in-hand. 
"George, you are not angry with me," Beryl began, when they reached the
drawing-room; "I could not stay away longer, I could not live without hearing
from you, without knowing you were well."
She was standing looking up in his face, and she could see, even through her
tears, how George was struggling to control himself. 
"And I have brought you (Walter Ambrose)," she went on; "I shall be happier to
know he is with you, because then I can never feel afraid of your forgetting me."
"Forgetting you, Beryl!" and the man's voice was full of anguish, as though he
were striving to bear some grievous inward pain. 
"If I leave (Walter Ambrose) with you, then I must sometimes come here to see
him  sometimes, you understand, George, till  till," and Beryl stopped and
hesitated, hesitated though she had been his wife, for something in his manner frightened her. 
"Till what, Beryl, till what, my own precious darling? Have none of you told
her?" he added, turning to Mark. "Good Heavens! has she no idea? has no one prepared her for it?"
Mark could not answer; he remembered well how he had misled her in that very
room, and he could not now open his lips to destroy the castle he had assisted her to build. 
"Prepared me for what, George?" she asked. "Oh! do you tell me; do you tell me;
do not let anybody else tell me, whatever it may be; whatever it may be. Are
you tired of me? are you sorry you ever saw me? Have I been a grief and a
trouble to you, George? If I have I will try to make it up to you hereafter,
only do not say you have ceased loving me; don't say that."
In her terror, she was getting almost incoherent, and when she held out her
arms for him to take her, as she might have done had she been a child, George
Geith felt all the courage ebbing away from his heart, all power to answer her
truly deserting him. 
"I do love you, darling; I shall love you for ever and for ever," he replied,
taking her to his heart, and laying the poor, weary head gently on his
shoulder. "God is my witness that I could as soon forget Him as I could forget
you; but, Beryl  will neither of you tell her?" he added, turning almost
fiercely to his aunt (Lady Geith) and cousin (Mark Geith), "or must I break her
heart myself? Why did you let her come here? why did you let her come?"
"Tell me yourself; tell me yourself," murmured Beryl; "but I guess what it is.
We cannot be married again, George; you are not able to get a divorce from her."
"I am not, and while she (mrs geith) lives "
"George," and she kept her head close to his heart while she spoke, "why cannot
you get a divorce? Tell me."
He told her; he stooped down and whispered the reason in her ear; he asked her
if she understood what he meant, and she made a movement of assent in answer. 
After a minute or two, she lifted her face, and asked Sir Mark and Lady Geith
to leave them alone together. But when they were alone, she said no word to the
man whom she loved so devotedly. He could not speak to her; she could not speak
to him. Straining her to his heart, he wrestled with his agony.
Lying passive in his arms, she bade farewell to every hope, to every
expectation, to every dream in silence. 
She did not utter any complaint; she did not ask now to stay with him. She did
not say, as she had once said, that unless he put her away she would never leave him. 
That was gone and past; she knew now they could not stay together, that spite
of all they had been to one another, in the sweet times of old, they could
never be more than strangers in the bitter time to come. 
One thing she did say; she did entreat him to keep the boy (Walter Ambrose).
"He will be a link between us, George," she pleaded; but he refused. He knew it
was only her unselfish love for him prompted the request. 
"And I swear this to you, Beryl," he finished; "that if that woman (Mrs. Geith)
should die, I will marry you again within the week. There is no need for me to
tell you this, I know; but still I swear it, nevertheless."
"I will not think of it," she answered, faintly; "I will not wish her dead; and
you, George, must try not to wish it either." It was impossible for him not to
wish her dead, but happily Beryl did not know what was passing through his
mind, for through many and many a weary day to come, the memory of that sad
afternoon, when she and George parted, stole over her heart as the sound of
mournful music comes soft and soothing over the waters. 
From that far-away land on which they had last stood together came those quiet
tones, those mournful, earnest words, over the separating waters of time and
distance to the woman who travelled through many scenes; who journeyed to many
fair lands with Lady Geith. 
Mother, Beryl called her new friend; daughter, Lady Geith loved to style her;
but no kindness, no friendship, no tenderness, no love could do much towards
restoring Beryl's health and spirits. 
It was all in vain that they followed the sun, and never let the cold wind
breathe upon Beryl's face; she was doomed, and when there could be no shadow of
doubt about the matter; when her own prayer was to see George, and return to
England, they came back by slow stages to her native country; came back but for
one purpose, that Beryl might die at home, die near him. 
And he, meantime, had been working fiercely as of old, so that if ever Beryl
and he did come together again, he might surround her with every comfort his love could suggest. 
"And, besides, there is the boy (walter ambrose)," thought George, "there is
the boy; "and so he worked on, toiled through the days, and the months, and the
years, to the sole end, as it seemed, for Mark to ask him one day to go to
Halkin Street to see Beryl, who had returned to England, and who was very, very ill. 
"Do you mean that she is worse than usual, that she is more than delicate?"
asked George, rising from his chair on the instant. 
"I do; she is very ill; she is very seriously ill. I am afraid, George, you
will find her sadly altered."
But his cousin did not answer; he was looking for his hat, and muttering
something to himself of which Sir Mark only heard the concluding words: "And
oh! my God, after all, has it come to this? "
CHAPTER 49. TILL ETERNITY. 

It had come to this! the former hereafter was the present; the former present
was the past; and stripped of all their glorious promise, disrobed of the rich
apparel in which hope had once decked their shadowy forms, the future days he
had fought for, longed for, laboured for, came to George Geith, bringing with
them the sorest trouble of his life. 
For he loved Beryl: God alone, who had heard in the darkness his sobbing
through the night, knew how passionately. She had been to him his all, his
life, his joy, his hope, his heaven. He had said to himself, that though they
were wandering solitary through weary and separate roads, there must come a
point where they would meet at last, never again to be parted. He had prayed
for the days of their trial to be shortened as he had never prayed for anything
before; as, clergyman though he had been, he once thought it impossible for the
created to pray to his Creator. He had talked with the Almighty about his
trouble as a man might talk with his friend; he had wearied the Lord with the
story of his anguish; he had importuned his Maker to hear the petitions of his
wretched, lonely suppliant, and the Omniscient was answering his petition for
her to be given back to him, by taking her away from him, so far as this earth
was concerned, for ever. Though the sunshine was streaming into the chamber,
the darkest hour he had ever faced, or ever could be called on to face in the
future, had come to George Geith. It was darkness visible, and through it he
groped blindly to meet his trouble, fighting madly and impotently against the inevitable sorrow. 
She should live, he could not spare her; she must live, the force of her own
will, the power of science, love, skill, money, beyond all things the might and
strength of his own despair, should keep her with him. For man, for God,
whether it were sin, or whether it were virtue; whether in the sight of heaven
they were man and wife, or whether it were criminal for them to stay together,
it mattered not to George Geith. They would never part again. 
Kneeling beside her, clasping the worn, transparent hands, kissing the wasted
cheek, stroking, scarcely knowing what he was doing, the thin hair once so
luxuriant, George told Beryl this. Recalling the days when they were together
sinfully, yet not sinfully, because they knew no sin, knew of no bar strong
enough to keep them asunder, the man went mad in his terrible trouble, and told
the woman who had been so loth to part from him that nothing should separate
them now, that he would stay with her for ever. 
Never a youth, standing in the full light of that sun-rising of love, which one
man never beholds twice, told such a tale of devotion, of passion, as George
Geith poured out then. Never was woman asked to give love back for love, as
Beryl was then asked to live, so that they might love one another; not that she
might be great and wealthy, not that she might have rank and influence, but
simply that heart might throb with heart, that they might live for and with each other.
He would have asked her the same had he not known where the morrow's meal was
to come from, and Beryl would have stayed, God help her, if she could. But
between her and him stood Death: before the gate of her earthly Eden there
stood a cherubim with flaming sword, which forbade all hope of ever re-entering
the paradise where, all innocently, she had dwelt. To all hopes, to all fears,
to the long fever, to the terrible suspense, she saw a speedy termination; she
had come, at last, to that page of human existence at the bottom whereof Finis
is written, and for her there was to be nothing more, whether of joy or of
sorrow, added to the volume for ever. The short day was drawing to its close 
that day which had been lived so fully; the book was written, the tale told,
the story ended; and knowing that what he was asking was impossible  knowing
that the question of right and wrong could never be raised between them again,
that there could be no more tearful resistance of sin, no more groping after
virtue  that it was no longer a question of whether she would or no, that the
inevitable "must" had come at last; Beryl, with arms clasped round his neck,
with head resting on his shoulder, raining tears over him, said it was of no
use talking about what was past and gone, that they must part, and that he knew it. 
Then for a moment George misunderstood her. The agony of her own heart, the
intense bitterness of the draught she was called upon to drink, the awful
hopelessness of her case, and the terrible longing she felt to be permitted to
live and love, once more sharpened her voice, and gave it a tone of reproach she never intended. 
"Have you grown to doubt me?" he asked. "Do you not know I would marry you
to-morrow if I could? Do you think that throughout all the years to come, let
them be many or let them be few, I could change to you? Oh, Beryl, do you not
believe that through time and through eternity I shall love you and none other?"
"I do not doubt, I believe;" and her tears fell faster, and her sobs became
more uncontrollable. "But, George, it is of no use: I have fought against pain,
but it has conquered me at last. Day and night I and Death have battled
together, but he has won, and I lost. I would not say to myself I could be
dying. I have held on to life so long as I had strength to do it, but now,
George  now  oh, my love  my love  my darling!"
And the sharp agony came again into her voice, and she cried out her words like
someone in bodily pain; whilst he, understanding fully what she meant,
comprehending that no human strength could hold her, no love help her, strained
her to his heart in a silence which with George Geith meant despair. 
What was she to him at that moment? More than wife; more than all the earth;
more than heaven; more than life. She was something more, far more, than any
poor words we know can express. 
What he felt for her was beyond love; the future he saw stretching away for
himself without her, without a hope of her, was in its blank weariness so
terrible as to be beyond despair. 
Had the soul been taken out of his body, life could not have been more
valueless. Take away the belief of immortality, and what has mortality left to
live for? At the moment George Geith knew, in a stupid, dull kind of way, that
to him Beryl had been an earthly immortality; that to have her again for his
own, had been the one hope of his weary life, which had made the days and the
hours endurable unto him. 
Oh! woe for the great waste of love which there is in this world below; to
think how it is filling some hearts to bursting, whilst others are starving for
the lack thereof; to think how those who may never be man and wife, those who
are about to be parted by death, those whose love can never be anything but a
sorrow and trial, merge their own identity in that of one another, whilst the
lawful hands of respectable households wrangle and quarrel, and honest widows
order their mourning with decorous resignation, and disconsolate husbands look
out for second wives. 
Why is it that the ewe lamb is always that selected for sacrifice? Why is it
that the creature upon which man sets his heart shall be the one snatched from
him? Why is it that the thing we prize perishes? that as the flower fades, and
the grass withereth, so the object of man's love, the delight of his. eyes and
the desire of his soul, passeth away to leave him desolate? 
On George Geith the blow fell with such force, that he groped about darkly,
trying to grasp his trouble; trying to meet some tangible foe with whom to
grapple. Life without Beryl; days without sun; winter without a hope of summer;
nights that could never know a dawn. My reader, have patience with the
despairing grief of this strong man, who had at length met with a sorrow that crushed him. 
Have patience whilst (I the narrator) try to tell of the end that came to his
business and to his pleasure; to the years he had spent in toil; to the hours
in which he had tasted enjoyment! To the struggles there had come success; to
the hopes fruition; but with success and with fruition there had come likewise death. 
Everything for him was ended in existence. Living, he was as one dead. Wealth
could not console him; success could not comfort him; for him, for this hard,
fierce worker, for the man who had so longed for rest, for physical repose, for
domestic pleasures, the flowers were to have no more perfume; home no more
happiness; the earth no more loveliness. The first spring blossoms, the summer
glory on tree and field, the fruits and flowers and thousand tinted leaves of
autumn, and the snows and frosts of winter, were never to touch his heart nor
stir his senses in the future.
Never the home he had pictured might be his, never, ah, never! He had built his
dream-house on the sands, and be hold the winds blew, and the waves beat, and
he saw it all disappear, leaving nought but dust and ashes, but death and despair! 
Madly he fought with his sorrow; as though it were a living thing that he could
grasp and conquer, he turned on it constantly and strove to trample it down. 
Could he see her die, and live? Could he ever go on, on through the years to
come, knowing no morrow that might ever dawn could bring her back again, that
she would never open the door and stand at his hearth, and kneel at his feet,
and lay her gentle hand on his burning temples more? 
Could he part with her, could he let her go away, and lay the body that had
held her in the grave, and still survive?
Oh, Lord! oh, God! how heavy is Thy hand, when it is laid upon man thus! How
despairingly does the creature fight against the sentence of the Creator, and
hope for a reverse, for a reprieve, until the mortal has become immortal! How
the days and the hours weary by, days and hours that are, nevertheless, all too
short and fleeting! 
How hard, how almost impossible does the torture seem to bear, and yet still
how inexorably is humanity forced to bear it, bound on the rack of life! 
Day by day, George Geith bore his torment in silence; day by day she glided
away from him down the river, and away to the sea. With this victim Death
played few tricks; he did not cover her with the waters one hour and lay her on
the bank the next. Lovingly almost he took her in his arms, and bore her gently
over the waves of time to the Eternal shores. 
So gently, so pitifully, so lingeringly he took her, that where he first lost
sight of her, George Geith could scarcely tell. Where Beryl grew dim, and the
"something else "began to take her place, he never could remember, he only knew
there came a time when she ceased to put out her hand to touch his; when, if he
took hers, there came no light into her face, when her eyes wore no look of
recognition at his entrance; when, in a word, "she ceased to take notice of
anything," and lay without resistance in the cold arms of that nurse who was
hushing her so gently to sleep. 
Before she died Beryl was gone. She had passed like the sunshine on the
Hertfordshire fields, like the roses in the Dower House garden, away from the
sight of the man who had loved her so passionately, before Death claimed her finally for his own. 
Girl, bride, wife, mother, heart-broken woman, were all vanished and gone,
whilst she was yet living and breathing. Beryl, his Beryl, had left him for
ever, and in her stead there remained something which knew no difference
between day and night, between one person and another, between sweet and
bitter, evil and good; which faded, and faded, and faded away, which had a life
so like death, that when death came, the watchers did not know it, but fancied
there was life still. And there was life then  life eternal.
CHAPTER 50.  CONCLUSION. 

When Beryl died, the life story of George Geith of Fen Court must, properly
speaking, be considered finished; for from the day when her body was laid in
the family vault at Great Snareham, he looked no more at the trees in the
church yard, or the graves within the iron railings. 
He left Fen Court to the occupancy of other men whose footsteps now echo under
the archway; who walk beside the iron railings; who enter the familiar house
and look from the windows of the rooms we know so well, at the back of the
houses in Cullum Street, or over the dreary pavement of Billiter Square. 
To another part of London; to a crowded thoroughfare; to a huge warehouse
George Geith conveyed his business, which he, a changed man, extended with the
aid of capital advanced by Lady Geith, till the house of Geith and Geith is at
this present time one of the largest and most respectable in the City. Geith
and Geith is a bona fide firm, for Sir Mark has taken to business with a will,
and is an active partner in the concern. 
Snareham was duly sold; that is, the broad acres and the goodly farms, and many
a small outlying property besides; but Snareham Castle, with its stately woods
and its fine park, with its noble terraces, its trees, its gardens, and its
historical associations, was reserved for George Geith, whose property it now
is. Lady Geith resides at the Castle with (Walter Ambrose), Beryl's only child;
and when he has leisure to spare from business, when he is able to leave London
for a few days, George Geith lives at the Castle, and wanders about the scenes
where he spent so many happy days in boyhood, with his boy (walter ambrose),
who has Beryl's eyes, the father thinks, and whose voice sometimes thrills into
the very innermost chambers of George's heart. 
In Great Snareham Rectory, the Rev. Mr Hayles has at length pitched his tent.
Mrs Hayles having succeeded in getting all her daughters (cissy) (sophy) (maud)
off her hands, now occupies herself in seeing that the young women in her
husband's parish have no such immoralities as lovers hanging about them.
When she is not employed in this laudable work, she is either toadying Lady
Geith, or scolding her husband. She has long since forgiven George for leaving
the Church, and thinks that she sees the finger of Providence in it (for herself and Mr Hayles). 
The world has never learnt that Sir Mark Geith was an imposition, and George
the rightful heir. Society, which is kind enough to interest itself greatly
about the wealthy owner of Snareham Castle, only knows that someday, if he
outlive Sir Mark, he will be a baronet; and that if a certain disreputable Mrs
Geith, who is now quite a respectable lady, residing at Brighton, on a
comfortable annuity, were dead, he, Mr George Geith, could marry again, in
which case, the son of such marriage would succeed to the title, (Walter
Ambrose) Geith being illegitimate. 
Wherever George Geith goes, his story travels with him; "Quite romantic," say
the young ladies; "Very sad," remark their mammas; and mammas and daughters
alike assail the melancholy-looking man, and pay a certain court to him, for he
is the fashion; perhaps, because he keeps out of the way of fashion and her votaries. 
Many a dowager has "marked" George Geith as a desirable match for one of her
numerous brood, should that "woman ever die;" but married or single, bond or
free, the owner of Snareham Castle will never look with a smile of love on the
face of woman again. 
He has no heart now; it is lying with Beryl in the vaults of Snareham Church;
and he would relinquish all his wealth, he would go through all the old
drudgery again; he would descend the ladder of worldly success and worldly
ambition to its lowest rung, if he could bring back again the days when, with a
hopeful spirit and a thankful heart, he walked hand-in-hand with Beryl; when he
was neither City magnate nor country squire, but only hard-working,
self-reliant George Geith of Fen Court. 
The End.
